Albert of Prussia ( 17 May 1490 20 March 1568 ) was the last Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights , who after converting to Lutheranism , became the first monarch of the Duchy of Prussia , the secularized state that emerged from the former Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights . Albert was the first European ruler to establish Protestantism as the official state religion of his lands . He proved instrumental in the political spread of Protestantism in its early stage , ruling the Prussian lands for nearly six decades ( 15101568 ) . A member of the Brandenburg-Ansbach branch of the House of Hohenzollern , Albert 's election as Grand Master had brought about hopes of a reversal of the declining fortune of the Teutonic Knights . He was a skilled political administrator and leader , and did indeed reverse the decline of the Teutonic Order . However , Albert , who was sympathetic to the demands of Martin Luther , rebelled against the Catholic church , and the Holy Roman Empire by converting the Teutonic state into a Protestant and hereditary realm , the his uncle , the King of Poland . The arrangement was confirmed by the Treaty of Krakw in 1525 . Albert pledged a personal oath to the King and in return was invested with the duchy for himself and his heirs . Albert 's rule in Prussia was fairly prosperous . Although he had some trouble with the peasantry , the confiscation of the lands and treasures of the Catholic church enabled him to propitiate the nobles and provide for the expenses of the newly established Prussian court . He was active in imperial politics , joining the League of Torgau in 1526 , and acted in unison with the Protestants in plotting to overthrow Emperor Charles V after the issue of the Augsburg Interim in May 1548 . Albert established schools in every town and founded Knigsberg University in 1544 . He promoted culture and arts , patronising the works of Erasmus Reinhold and Caspar Hennenberger . Albert 's final years were clouded by peasant resentment of heavy taxes , a step he felt compelled to take due to there no longer being any church land available to confiscate in , and Paul Skali also caused various religious and political disputes . Albert spent his final years virtually deprived of power , and died at Tapiau on 20 March 1568 . His son Albert Frederick succeeded him as Duke of Prussia . Albert 's dissolution of the Teutonic State caused the founding of the Duchy of Prussia , paving the way for the rise of the House of Hohenzollern . He is therefore often seen as the father of the Prussian nation , and even as indirectly responsible for the unification of Germany . # Early life # Albert was born in Ansbach in Franconia as the third son of Frederick I , Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach . His mother was Sophia , daughter of Casimir IV Jagiellon , Grand Duke of Lithuania and King of Poland , and his wife Elisabeth of Austria . He was raised for a career in the Church and spent some time at the court of Hermann IV of Hesse , Elector of Cologne , who appointed him canon of the Cologne Cathedral . Despite being quite religious , he was also interested in mathematics and teachings of the Church in favour of scientific theories . His career was forwarded by the Church however and institutions of the Catholic clerics supported his early advance . Turning to a more active life , Albert accompanied Emperor Maximilian I to Italy in 1508 , and after his return spent some time in the Kingdom of Hungary . # Grand Master # Duke Frederick of Saxony , Grand Master of the Teutonic Order , died in December 1510 . Albert was chosen as his successor early in 1511 in the hope that his relationship to his maternal uncle , Sigismund I the Old , Grand Duke of Lithuania and King of Poland , would facilitate a settlement of the disputes over eastern Prussia , which had been held by the Order under Polish suzerainty since the Second Peace of Thorn ( 1466 ) . The new Grand Master , aware of his duties to the empire and to the papacy , refused to submit to the crown of Poland . As war over the Order 's existence appeared inevitable , Albert made strenuous efforts to secure allies and carried on by the ravages of members of the Order in Poland , culminated in a war which began in December 1519 and devastated Prussia . Albert was granted a four-year truce early in 1521 . The dispute was referred to Emperor Charles V and other princes , but as no settlement was reached Albert continued his efforts to obtain help in view of a renewal of the war . For this purpose he visited the Diet of Nuremberg in 1522 , where he made the acquaintance of the Reformer Andreas Osiander , by whose influence Albert was won over to Protestantism . The Grand Master then journeyed to Wittenberg , where he was advised by Martin Luther to abandon the rules of his Order , to marry , and to convert Prussia into a hereditary duchy for himself . This proposal , which was understandably appealing to Albert , had already been discussed by some of his relatives ; but it was necessary to proceed cautiously , and he assured Pope Adrian VI that he was anxious to reform the Order and punish the knights who had adopted Lutheran doctrines . Luther but in order to facilitate the change made special efforts to spread his teaching among the Prussians , while Albert 's brother , Margrave George of Brandenburg-Ansbach , laid the scheme before their uncle , Sigismund I the Old of Poland . # Duke in Prussia # After some delay Sigismund assented to the offer , with the provision that Prussia should be treated as a Polish fiefdom ; and after this arrangement had been confirmed by a treaty concluded at Krakw , Albert pledged a personal oath to Sigismund I and was invested with the duchy for himself and his heirs on 10 February 1525 . The Estates of the land then met at Knigsberg ( Kaliningrad ) and took the oath of allegiance to the new duke , who used his full powers to promote the doctrines of Luther . This transition did not , however , take place without protest . Summoned before the imperial court of justice , Albert refused to appear and was proscribed , while the Order elected a new Grand Master , Walter von Cronberg , who received Prussia as a fief at the experiencing the tumult of the Reformation , the German Peasants ' War , and the wars against the Ottoman Turks , they did not enforce the ban on the duke , and agitation against him soon died away . In imperial politics Albert was fairly active . Joining the League of Torgau in 1526 , he acted in unison with the Protestants , and was among the princes who banded and plotted together to overthrow Charles V after the issue of the Augsburg Interim in May 1548 . For various reasons , however , poverty and personal inclination among others , he did not take a prominent part in the military operations of this period . The early years of Albert 's rule in Prussia were fairly prosperous . Although he had some trouble with the peasantry , the lands and treasures of the church enabled him to propitiate the nobles and for a time to provide for the expenses of the court . He did something for the furtherance of learning by establishing schools in every town and by freeing serfs who adopted a scholastic life . In 1544 , , where he appointed his friend Andreas Osiander to a professorship in 1549 . Albert also paid for the printing of the Astronomical Prutenic Tables compiled by Erasmus Reinhold and the first maps of Prussia by Caspar Hennenberger . This step was the beginning of the troubles which clouded the closing years of Albert 's reign . Osiander 's divergence from Luther 's doctrine of justification by faith involved him in a violent quarrel with Philip Melanchthon , who had adherents in Knigsberg , and these theological disputes soon created an uproar in the town . The duke strenuously supported Osiander , and the area of the quarrel soon broadened . There were no longer church lands available with which to conciliate the nobles , the burden of taxation was heavy , and Albert 's rule became unpopular . After Osiander 's death in 1552 , Albert favoured a preacher named Johann Funck , who , with an adventurer named Paul Skali , exercised great influence over him and obtained considerable wealth at public expense . The state of turmoil caused by these religious and political disputes was increased by the should that happen , to appoint a regent , as his only son , Albert Frederick was still a mere youth . The duke was forced to consent to a condemnation of the teaching of Osiander , and the climax came in 1566 when the Estates appealed to King Sigismund II Augustus of Poland , Albert 's cousin , who sent a commission to Knigsberg . Skali saved his life by flight , but Funck was executed . The question of the regency was settled , and a form of Lutheranism was adopted and declared binding on all teachers and preachers . Virtually deprived of power , the duke lived for two more years , and died at Tapiau on 20 March 1568 . Cornelis Floris de Vriendt designed his tomb within Knigsberg Cathedral . Albert was a voluminous letter writer , and corresponded with many of the leading personages of the time . # Legacy # Although Albert has received relatively little recognition in German history , his dissolution of the Teutonic State caused the founding of the Duchy of Prussia , which would eventually become arguably the most powerful . Albert is therefore often seen as the father of the Prussian nation , and even as indirectly responsible for the unification of Germany . He was a skilled political administrator and leader , and effectively reversed the decline of the Teutonic Order , until he betrayed it by transforming the order 's lands into his own duchy , secularizing it in the process . Albert was the first German noble to support Luther 's ideas and in 1544 founded the University of Knigsberg , the Albertina , as a rival to the Roman Catholic Cracow Academy . It was the second Lutheran university in the German states , after the University of Marburg . A relief of Albert over the Renaissance-era portal of Knigsberg Castle 's southern wing was created by Andreas Hess in 1551 according to plans by Christoph Rmer . Another relief by an unknown artist was included in the wall of the Albertina 's original campus . This depiction , which showed the duke with his sword over his shoulder , was the popular Albertus , the symbol of the university . The original was moved to while the sculptor Paul Kimritz created a duplicate for the wall . Another version of the Albertus by Lothar Sauer was included at the entrance of the Knigsberg State and Royal Library . In 1880 Friedrich Reusch created a sandstone bust of Albert at the Regierungsgebude , the administrative building for Regierungsbezirk Knigsberg . On 19 May 1891 Reusch premiered a famous statue of Albert at Knigsberg Castle with the inscription : Albert of Brandenburg , Last Grand Master , First Duke in Prussia . Albert Wolff also designed an equestrian statue of Albert located at the new campus of the Albertina . King 's Gate contains a statue of Albert . Albert was oft-honored in the quarter Maraunenhof in northern Knigsberg . Its main street was named Herzog-Albrecht-Allee in 1906 . Its town square , Knig-Ottokar-Platz , was renamed Herzog-Albrecht-Platz in 1934 to match its church , the **31;17536;TOOLONG # Spouse and issue # Albert married first , to Princess Dorothea ( 1 August 1504 11 April 1547 ) , daughter of King Frederick I of Denmark , in 1526 . They had six children ; *Anna Sophia ( 15271591 ( 15291530 ) *Lucia Dorothea ( 15311532 ) *Lucia ( 15371539 ) *Albert ( 15391539 ) He married secondly to Anna Maria ( 153220 March 1568 ) , daughter of Eric I , Duke of Brunswick-Lneburg , in 1550 . The couple had two children ; *Elisabeth ( 15511596 ) *Albert Frederick ( 15531618 ) # Ancestors # <center> ahnentafel-compact5 </center> # Notes #
 subdivisiontype1 = Governorate Aswan ( ; ' ' ' ' ; Ancient Egyptian : ' ' ' ' **28;11287;span ; </span> ' ' ' ' **28;11317;span ; </span> ' ' ' ' **28;11347;span ) </span> , formerly spelled ' ' Assuan ' ' **26;11377;span , </span> is a city in the south of Egypt , the capital of the Aswan Governorate . Aswan is a busy market and tourist centre located just north of the Aswan Dams on the east bank of the Nile at the first cataract . The modern city has expanded and includes the formerly separate community on the island of Elephantine . # History # Aswan is the ancient city of ' ' Swenett ' ' **26;11405;span , </span> which in antiquity was the frontier town of Ancient Egypt facing the south . Swenett is supposed to have derived its name from an Egyptian goddess with the same name . The city is mentioned by numerous ancient writers , including Herodotus , Strabo , Stephanus of Byzantium , Ptolemy , Pliny the Elder , Vitruvius , and it appears on the Antonine Itinerary . the Book of Isaiah . The latitude of the city that would become Aswan located at 24 5 23 was an object of great interest to the ancient geographers . They believed that it was seated immediately under the tropic , and that on the day of the summer solstice , a vertical staff cast no shadow . They noted that the sun 's disc was reflected in a well at noon . This statement is only approximately correct ; at the summer solstice , the shadow was only <sup> 1 </sup> / <sub> 400 </sub> th of the staff , and so could scarcely be discerned , and the northern limb of the Sun 's disc would be nearly vertical . However , Eratosthenes used this information together with measurements of the shadow length on the solstice at Alexandria to perform the first known calculation of the circumference of the Earth . The Nile is nearly 2.7 m wide above Aswan . From this frontier town to the northern extremity of Egypt , the river flows for more than without bar or cataract . The voyage from Aswan to Alexandria # Climate # Aswan has a hot desert climate ( Kppen climate classification BWh ) like the rest of Egypt . Aswan and Luxor have the hottest summer days of any other city in Egypt . Aswan is one of the hottest , sunniest and driest cities in the world . Averages high temperatures are above 40 C ( 104 F ) during summer ( June , July , August ) while averages low temperatures remain above 25 C ( 77 F ) . Summers are long , prolonged and extremely hot . Averages high temperatures remain above 23 C ( 73.4 F ) during the coldest month of the year while averages low temperatures remain above 8 C ( 46.4 F ) . Winters are short , brief and extremely warm . Wintertime is very pleasant and enjoyable while summertime is unbearably hot with blazing sunshine although desert heat is dry . The climate of Aswan is extremely dry year-round , with less than 1 mm of average annual precipitation . The desert city is one of the driest ones in the world , and rainfall does n't occur every there was seven years earlier . Aswan is one of the least humid cities on the planet , with an average relative humidity of only 26% , with a maximum mean of 42% during winter and a minimum mean of 16% during summer . The climate of Aswan is extremely clear , bright and sunny year-round , in all seasons , with a low seasonal variation , with about some 4,000 hours of annual sunshine , very close of the maximum theoretical sunshine duration . Aswan is one of the sunniest places on Earth . The highest record temperature was on May 22 , 1973 and the lowest record temperature was on January 6 , 1989. cite web # Education # In 1999 , South Valley University was inaugurated and it has three branches ; Aswan , Qena and Hurghada . It was the first university in Upper Egypt and it was organized in departmental basis . The university grew steadily and now it is firmly established as a major institution of higher education in Upper Egypt . Aswan branch of Assiut University began in 1973 with the Faculty of Education Aswan branch has five faculties namely ; Science , Education , Engineering , Arts , Social Works and Institute of Energy . The Faculty of Science in Aswan has six departments . Each department has one educational programme : Chemistry , Geology , Physics and Zoology . Except Botany Department , which has three educational programmes : Botany , Environmental Sciences and Microbiology ; and Mathematics Department , which has two educational programmes : Mathematics and Computer Science . The Faculty of Science awards the following degrees : Bachelor of Science in nine educational programmes , Higher Diploma , Master of Science and Philosophy Doctor of Science . Over 100 academic staff members are employed in. # Transport # Aswan is served by the Aswan International Airport . Train and bus service is also available . Taxi and rickshaw are used for transport here . <center> <gallery> File:S F-E-CAMERON **37;11433;TOOLONG Michael 's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral , built in the Coptic style File:AswanIMG0764.jpgThe El-Tabia Mosque in Aswan File:Railway Station Street , Aswan , Egypt , Oct 2004 A.jpgA view along the street connecting railway station and Nile File:Aswan Street , Egypt , Lotus-Tower near Aswan File : Assuan.jpgAswan File:Aswan , NE.jpgThe northeast neighbourhood File:Nile N517266177 30554 627. jpgThe Nile near Aswan **34;11472;TOOLONG Museum : entrance </gallery> </center> # See also # * Wadi Allaqi national park * Abu Simbel * Aswan Dam * Elephantine * Philae * Luxor * Kitchener 's Island * Temple of Kalabsha * Nubia * Banu Kanz * Coptic Diocese of Syene # References # * 
 The Government of Barbados ( GoB ) , is made up structurally of The Monarch , Queen Elizabeth II as Head of State . She is represented by her representative the Governor-General , Sir Elliott Belgrave , G.C.M.G. , K.A. , The country has a bicameral legislature and a mature social democratic party system , based on universal adult suffrage and total purity in elections . The Senate has 21 members , all appointed by the Governor-General on behalf of the Monarch , 12 on the advice of the Prime Minister , two on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition , and seven in the Governor-Generals sole discretion . The House of Assembly has 30 members , all elected . Both Houses debate all legislation . However , the House of Assembly may ultimately override Senate 's rejection of money Bills and other Bills except Bills amending the Constitution . Officers of each House ( President and Deputy President of the Senate and Speaker , Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees of the Assembly ) are elected from the Members of the respective Houses . In , Barbados has evolved into a leading independent Parliamentary democracy and Constitutional monarchy , meaning that all real power rests with the Parliament , but the country maintains aspects of a historic Monarchy/Kingdom government also , which allows stability . Executive authority is vested in the Monarch who grants all functioning of the government to both the Prime Minister and Cabinet who are collectively responsible to Parliament . Barbadian law is rooted historically on English common law , and the Constitution of Barbados implemented in 1966 , is supreme law of the land . Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the individual are set out in the Constitution and are protected by a strict legal code . The Cabinet is headed by the Prime Minister who must be an elected MP and other Ministers are appointed from either chamber by the Governor-General as advised by the Prime Minister . The Governor-General appoints as Leader of the Opposition the Member of House of Assembly who commands the support of the largest number of Members of that House in opposition to the ruling party 's government . The maximum duration of a Parliament is simultaneous dissolution of both Houses of Parliament by the Governor-General acting on the advice of the Prime Minister . There is an established non-political public service . Also , there are separate constitutional commissions for : the Judicial and Legal Service , the Public Service , and the Police Service . # History # The government has been chosen by elections since 1961 elections , when Barbados achieved full self-governance . Before then , the government was a Crown colony consisting of either colonial administration solely ( such as the Executive Council ) , or a mixture of colonial rule and a partially elected assembly , such as the Legislative Council . Since Independence , the Barbados Labour Party ( BLP ) governed from 1976 to 1986 , and from September 1994 2008 . The Democratic Labour Party ( DLP ) held office 1966 to 1976 , from 1986 to 1994 , and has formed the Government January 2008 to present . # Executive branch # The Prime Minister and Cabinet is formed by the political party which gains a simple majority in the general elections held in Barbados . These years apart , however elections can be called whenever the Government so chooses to seek a new mandate or loses a vote of no confidence in Parliament . It is part of Barbados ' political system and supported by the Public service . # Ministries # **64;184456;span &amp;#x5b ; edit table&amp;#x5d ; </span> # Judicial Branch # Barbados ' Courts include the Magistrates ' Court , High Court , and Court of Appeal . It is also a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice , and allows some appeals to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights . # Perception # Transparency International ranked Barbados as 17th place ( of 179 ) in the world on its corruption perceptions index in 2010 , with only 1 nation scoring better in the Americas . ( ) # See also # *Politics of Barbados *Monarchy of Barbados *Parliament of Barbados *Prime Minister of Barbados *Cabinet of Barbados 
 Genetically modified maize ( corn ) is a genetically modified crop . Specific maize strains have been genetically engineered to express agriculturally-desirable traits , including resistance to pests and to herbicides . Maize strains with both traits are now in use in multiple countries . GM maize has also caused controversy with respect to possible health effects , impact on other insects and impact on other plants via gene flow . One strain , called Starlink , was approved only for animal feed in the US , but was found in food , leading to a series of recalls starting in 2000. # Marketed Products # # Herbicide resistant maize # Corn varieties resistant to glyphosate herbicides were first commercialized in 1996 by Monsanto , and are known as Roundup Ready Corn . They tolerate the use of Roundup . Bayer CropScience developed Liberty Link Corn that is resistant to glufosinate . Pioneer Hi-Bred has developed and markets corn hybrids with tolerance to imidazoline herbicides under the trademark Clearfield - though in these hybrids , the herbicide-tolerance trait was bred using tissue culture selection and the chemical mutagen framework governing the approval of transgenic crops does not apply for Clearfield . As of 2011 , herbicide-resistant GM corn was grown in 14 countries . By 2012 , 26 varieties herbicide-resistant GM maize were authorised for import into the European Union . In 2012 the EU was reported to import 30 million tons a year of GM crops , but such imports remain controversial . Cultivation of herbicide-resistant corn in the EU provides substantial farm-level benefits . # Insecticide-producing corn # Bt corn is a variant of maize that has been genetically altered to express one or more proteins from the Bacillus thuringiensis bacteria . The protein is poisonous to certain insect pests and is widely used in organic gardening . The European corn borer causes about a billion dollars in damage to corn crops each year . In recent years , traits have been added to ward off Corn ear worms and root worms , the latter of which annually causes about a billion dollars in damages . The Bt protein is expressed throughout the plant . When a vulnerable insect eats the Bt-containing plant , the protein is human gut is acidic ) . In the alkaline environment the protein partially unfolds and is cut by other proteins , forming a toxin that paralyzes the insect 's digestive system and forms holes in the gut wall . The insect stops eating within a few hours and eventually starves . In 1996 , the first GM maize producing a Bt Cry protein was approved , which killed the European corn borer and related species ; subsequent Bt genes were introduced that killed corn rootworm larvae . Bt genes that are approved include the following , singly and stacked ( event name between brackets ) : Cry1A.105 ( MON89034 ) , CryIAb ( MON810 ) , CryIF ( 1507 ) , Cry2Ab ( MON89034 ) , Cry3Bb1 ( MON863 and MON88017 ) , Cry34Ab1 ( 59122 ) , Cry35Ab1 ( 59122 ) , mCry3A ( MIR604 ) , and Vip3A ( MIR162 ) , in both corn and cotton . Corn genetically modified to produce VIP was first approved in the US in 2010. # Drought resistance # In 2013 Monsanto launched the first transgenic drought tolerance trait in a line is provided by the insertion of the cspB gene from the soil microbe ' ' Bacillus subtilis ' ' ; it was approved by the USDA in 2011 and by China in 2013. # # Sweet corn # # GM sweet corn varieties include Attribute , the brand name for insect-resistant sweet corn developed by Syngenta. # Products in development # In 2007 , South African researchers announced the production of transgenic maize resistant to maize streak virus ( MSV ) , although it has not been released as a product . # Refuges # US Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) regulations require farmers who plant Bt corn to plant non-Bt corn nearby ( called a refuge ) to provide a location to harbor vulnerable pests . The theory behind these refuges is to slow the evolution of resistance to the pesticide . EPA regulations also require seed companies to train farmers how to maintain refuges , to collect data on the refuges and to report that data to the EPA . A study of these reports found that from 2003 to 2005 farmer compliance with keeping refuges was above corn farmers did not keep refuges properly , raising concerns that resistance would develop . Unmodified crops received most of the economic benefits of Bt corn in the US in 1996-2007 , because of the overall reduction of pest populations . This reduction came because females laid eggs on modified and unmodified strains alike . # Resistance # Resistant strains of the European corn borer have developed in areas with defective or absent refuge management . In November 2009 , Monsanto scientists found the pink bollworm had become resistant to first-generation Bt cotton in parts of Gujarat , India - that generation expresses one Bt gene , ' ' Cry1Ac ' ' . This was the first instance of Bt resistance confirmed by Monsanto anywhere in the world . Bollworm resistance to first generation Bt cotton has been identified in the Australia , China , Spain and the United States . In 2012 , a Florida field trial demonstrated that army worms were resistant to pesticide-containing GM corn produced by Dupont-Dow ; armyworm resistance was first discovered in Puerto Rico in 2006 , prompting Dow and DuPont to voluntarily stop selling of GM crops varies between countries , with some of the most-marked differences occurring between the USA and Europe . Regulation varies in a given country depending on intended uses . # Controversy # Broad scientific consensus holds that food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food . The scientific rigor of the studies regarding human health has been disputed due to alleged lack of independence and due to conflicts of interest involving governing bodies and some of those who perform and evaluate the studies . GM crops provide a number of ecological benefits , but there are also concerns for their overuse , stalled research outside of the Bt seed industry , proper management and issues with Bt resistance arising from their misuse . Critics have objected to GM crops on ecological , economic and health grounds . The economic issues derive from those organisms that are subject to intellectual property law , mostly patents . The first generation of GM crops lose patent protection beginning in 2015 . Monsanto has claimed it will not to pursue farmers who retain seeds of off-patent plant to impact nontarget organisms before approving commercial release . A 1999 study found that in a lab environment , pollen from Bt maize dusted onto milkweed could harm the monarch butterfly . Several groups later studied the phenomenon in both the field and the laboratory , resulting in a risk assessment that concluded that any risk posed by the corn to butterfly populations under real-world conditions was negligible . A 2002 review of the scientific literature concluded that the commercial large-scale cultivation of current Btmaize hybrids did not pose a significant risk to the monarch population . A 2007 review found that nontarget invertebrates are generally more abundant in Bt cotton and Bt maize fields than in nontransgenic fields managed with insecticides . However , in comparison with insecticide-free control fields , certain nontarget taxa are less abundant in Bt fields . # Gene flow # Gene flow is the transfer of genes and/or alleles from one species to another . Concerns focus on the interaction between GM and other maize varieties in Mexico , and of gene flow into refuges . In 2009 the government of Mexico created a is the center of diversity for maize , gene flow could affect a large fraction of the world 's maize strains . A 2001 report in ' ' Nature ' ' presented evidence that Bt maize was cross-breeding with unmodified maize in Mexico . The data in this paper was later described as originating from an artifact . ' ' Nature ' ' later stated , the evidence available is not sufficient to justify the publication of the original paper . A 2005 large-scale study failed to find any evidence of contamination in Oaxaca . However , other authors also found evidence of cross-breeding between natural maize and transgenic maize . A 2004 study found Bt protein in kernels of refuge corn . # Food # The French High Council of Biotechnologies Scientific Committee reviewed the 2009 Vendmois ' ' et al . ' ' study and concluded that it .. presents no admissible scientific element likely to ascribe any haematological , hepatic or renal toxicity to the three re-analysed GMOs . A 2011 Canadian study looked at the presence of CryAb1 protein ( BT toxin ) in non-pregnant women , levels of the protein , including 93% of pregnant women and 80% of fetuses at concentrations of 0.19 0.30 and 0.04 0.04 mean SD ng/ml , respectively . The paper did not discuss safety implications or find any health problems . The paper was found to be unconvincing by multiple authors and organizations . In a swine model , Cry1Ab-specific antibodies were not detected in pregnant sows or their offspring and no negative effects from feeding Bt maize to pregnant sows were observed . In January 2013 , the European Food Safety Authority released all data submitted by Monsanto in relation to the 2003 authorisation of maize genetically modified for glyphosate tolerance . # Starlink corn recalls # StarLink contains Cry9C , which had not previously been used in a GM crop . Starlink 's creator , Plant Genetic Systems had applied to the US Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) to market Starlink for use in animal feed and in human food . StarLink corn was subsequently found in food destined for consumption by humans in the US , Japan , and South Korea . This corn became the subject when Taco Bell-branded taco shells sold in supermarkets were found to contain the corn . Sales of StarLink seed were discontinued . The registration for Starlink varieties was voluntarily withdrawn by Aventis in October 2000 . ( Pioneer had been bought by AgrEvo which then became Aventis CropScience at the time of the incident , which was later bought by Bayer Fifty-one people reported adverse effects to the FDA ; US Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) , which determined that 28 of them were possibly related to Starlink . However , the CDC studied the blood of these 28 individuals and concluded there was no evidence of hypersensitivity to the Starlink Bt protein . A subsequent review of these tests by the Federal Insecticide , Fungicide , and Rodenticide Act Scientific Advisory Panel points out that while the negative results decrease the probability that the Cry9C protein is the cause of allergic symptoms in the individuals examined .. in the absence of a positive control and questions regarding the sensitivity and specificity of the assay , it is not possible to assign a negative predictive value to this . of the Starlink Bt proteins since 2001 . In 2005 , aid sent by the UN and the US to Central American nations also contained some StarLink corn . The nations involved , Nicaragua , Honduras , El Salvador and Guatemala refused to accept the aid . In August 2013 , StarLink corn was reported to be found in some foods in Saudi Arabia . # Corporate Espionage # On December 19 , 2013 six Chinese citizens were indicted in Iowa on charges of plotting to steal genetically modified seeds worth tens of millions of dollars to Monsanto and DuPont Mo Hailong , director of international business at the Beijing Dabeinong Technology Group Co. , part of the Beijing-based DBN Group , was accused of stealing trade secrets after he was found digging in an Iowa cornfield . # See also # * Genetically modified food * Genetically modified crops * Genetically modified food controversies # References # 
 imageshield = Dublin crest.svg County Dublin ( or ' ' Contae tha Cliath ' ' ) is a county in Ireland . It is sometimes officially referred to as the Dublin Region and is in the province of Leinster . It is named after the city of Dublin , which is the regional capital and the capital city of Ireland . County Dublin was one of the first parts of Ireland to be shired by King John of England following the Norman invasion of Ireland . Prior to 1994 County Dublin was an administrative county run by a county council with functional area covering the whole county excluding the functional area of Dublin City Council . In 1994 Dublin County Council was abolished and replaced with three separate administrative county councils : Dn LaoghaireRathdown , Fingal and South Dublin . The population of the county was 1,270,603 according to the census of 2011. # Local government and politics # There are four local authorities whose remit collectively encompasses the geographic area of the county and city of Dublin . These are Dublin City Council , South Dublin County . There is also Dublin Regional Authority which has authority over the while county but this body has few powers . It consists of 30 representatives who meet once per month . These representatives are nominated from the four administrative councils of the region . Like each Regional Authority , it is assisted in its duties by an Operational Committee and EU Operational Committee . Prior to the enactment of the Local Government ( Dublin ) Act 1993 , the county was a unified whole even though it was administered by two local authorities - Dublin County Council and Dublin Corporation . Since the enactment of the Local Government Act 2001 in particular , the geographic area of the county has been divided between three entities at the level of county and a further entity at the level of city . They rank equally as first level local administrative units of the NUTS 3 Dublin Region for Eurostat purposes . There are 34 LAU 1 entities in the Republic of Ireland . Each local authority is responsible for certain local services such as sanitation , planning and development , libraries , housing . The county is part of the Dublin constituency for the purposes of European elections . For elections to Dil ireann , the area of the county is today divided into twelve constituencies : Dublin Central , Dublin MidWest , Dublin North , Dublin NorthCentral , Dublin NorthEast , Dublin NorthWest , Dublin South , Dublin SouthCentral , Dublin SouthEast , Dublin SouthWest , Dublin West and Dn Laoghaire . Together they return 47 deputies ( TDs ) to the Dil. # Dublin Region # The Dublin Region is a NUTS Level III region of Ireland . The region is one of eight regions of the Republic of Ireland for the purposes of Eurostat statistics . Its NUTS code is IE021 . It is co-extensive with the old county . The regional capital is Dublin City which is also the national capital . It is governed by the Dublin Regional Authority which consists of 30 representatives who meet once per month . These representatives are nominated from the four administrative councils of the region : *Dublin City Council ( 14 ) *South Dublin County Council , ( 6 ) including Regions *Dn Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council ( 5 ) *Fingal County Council ( 5 ) Like each Regional Authority , the DRA is assisted in its duties by an Operational Committee and EU Operational Committee . # Dissolution of Dublin County Council # Dublin County Council ( which did not include the county borough of Dublin ) was abolished in 1994 and the area divided among the administrative counties of Dn LaoghaireRathdown , Fingal and South Dublin each with its county seat . To these areas may be added the area of Dublin city which collectively comprise the Dublin Region ( ' ' ' ' ) and come under the remit of the Dublin Regional Authority . The area lost its administrative county status in 1994 , with Section 9 Part 1(a) of the ' ' Local Government ( Dublin ) Act , 1993 ' ' stating that the county shall cease to exist . At that time , and in response to a European Council report highlighting Ireland as the most centralised country in the European Union , it was decided that a single County Dublin was unmanageable and undemocratic from dissolve Dublin County Council , Avril Doyle TD said , The Bill before us today effectively abolishes County Dublin , and as one born and bred in these parts of Ireland I find it rather strange that we in this House are abolishing County Dublin . I am not sure whether Dubliners realise that that is what we are about today , but in effect that is the case . Despite the legal status of the Dublin Region , the term County Dublin is still in common usage . Many organisations and sporting teams continue to organise on a County Dublin or Dublin Region basis . The area formerly known as County Dublin is now defined in legislation solely as the Dublin Region under the ' ' Local Government Act , 1991 ( Regional Authorities ) ( Establishment ) Order , 1993 ' ' , and this is the terminology officially used by the four Dublin administrative councils in press releases concerning the former county area . The term ' ' Greater Dublin Area ' ' , which might consist of some or all of the Dublin Region along with counties standing . The latest Ordnance Survey Ireland Discovery Series ( Third Edition 2005 ) 1:50,000 map of the Dublin Region , Sheet 50 , shows the boundaries of the city and three surrounding counties of the region . Extremities of the Dublin Region , in the north and south of the region , appear in other sheets of the series , 43 and 56 respectively . # Media # * The local radio stations include 98FM , FM104 , 103.2 Dublin City FM , Dublin 's Q102 , Spin 1038 , Dublin 's Country Mix 106.8 , Phantom 105.2 and Radio Nova . * The local newspapers include ' ' Dublin Penny Journal ' ' , ' ' The Echo ' ' , ' ' The Northside People ' ' , ' ' The Southside People ' ' , ' ' Liffey Champion ' ' and ' ' The Metro Herald ' ' . Most of the area can receive the five main UK television channels on analogue television as well as the main Irish channels , along with Sky TV and UPC cable television . # Transport # * Road N4 and N7 national primary roads , and the M1 , M11 and M50 motorways . * Heavy rail : The InterCity and Commuter rail services ( Iarnrd ireann ) . * Light rail : The Luas tram system serving Dublin City and its southern and western suburbs . * Rapid transit : The DART and the proposed Dublin Metro line . * Port : Dublin Port and Dn Laoghaire Harbour . * Air : Dublin International Airport . # Economy # The economy of County Dublin was identified as being the powerhouse behind the Celtic Tiger , a period of strong economic growth of the state . This resulted in the economy of the county expanding by almost 100% between the early 1990s and 2007 . This growth resulted from incoming high-value industries , such as financial services and software manufacturing , as well as low-skilled retail and domestic services , which caused a shift away from older manufacturing-industry . This change saw high unemployment in the 1980s and early 1990s which resulted in damage to the capitals social structure . County Dublin 's GDP in 2002 was 42.505bn , , and 171% of the European Union average . The workforce of the county in 2003 was 555,306 which equated to a 95.9% employment rate with services ( 80.0% ) , industrial employment ( 12.0% ) , and construction ( 8.0% ) forming the key industries . # Transport # County Dublin is the main transport node of Ireland , and contains one international airport , Dublin Airport . It is also served by two main seaports , Dn Laoghaire port and Dublin Port , which is just located outside of the city center . The two main train stations are Dublin Heuston and Dublin Connolly , both of which serve intercity trains . # Demographics # According to the 2006 census , County Dublin had a population of 1,187,176 , which constitutes 30% of the national population . This was an increase of 9.5% on 2002 figures . Its population density was 1,218/km . The population of Dublin City , was 506,211 . The median age of the population of the county in the 2006 census was 35.6 years , with 62% of people aged between 2064 years old . 48,000 , with a natural increase of 33,000 people . There are 10,469 Irish speakers in County Dublin attending the 31 Gaelscoils ( Irish language primary schools ) and eight Gaelcholiste ( Irish language secondary schools ) . There may be up to another 10,000 Irish speakers from the Gaeltacht living and working in Dublin also . # Urban areas # A list of the largest urban areas ( those with over 1,000 inhabitants ) in County Dublin . Administrative county seats are shown in bold . class= wikitable ! Rank ! Urban area ! County ! Population <small> ( 2006 census ) # Towns and suburbs # * Adamstown * Artane * Ashtown * Balbriggan * Baldoyle * Balgriffin * Ballinteer * Ballsbridge * Ballyboden * Ballybrack * Ballybough * Ballyfermot * Ballygall * Ballymount * Ballymun * Ballyroan * Balrothery * Bayside * Beaumont * Belfield * Blackrock * Blanchardstown * Bluebell * Booterstown * Brittas * Broadstone * Ballyboughal * Cabinteely * Cabra * Carrickmines * Castleknock * Chapelizod * Cherrywood * Churchtown * Clondalkin * Clonsilla * Clonskeagh * Clontarf * Coolmine * Coolock * Corduff * Deansgrange * Dollymount * Dolphin 's Barn * Donabate * Donaghmede * Donnybrook * Donnycarney * Drimnagh * Drumcondra * Dn Laoghaire * Dundrum * East Wall * Edmondstown * Fairview * Finglas * Firhouse * Foxrock * Garristown * Glasnevin * Glasthule * Glencullen * Glenageary * Goatstown * Grangegorman * Harold 's Cross * Howth * Inchicore * Irishtown * Islandbridge * Jobstown * Kill O ' The Grange * Kilbarrack * Killester * Killiney * Kilmacud * Kilmainham * Kilnamanagh * Kilternan * Kimmage * Kinsealy * Knocklyon * Leopardstown * Loughlinstown * Lucan * Lusk * Malahide * Marino * Milltown * Monkstown * Mount Merrion * Mulhuddart * Newcastle * Naul * Oldbawn * Ongar * Palmerstown * Phibsborough * Portmarnock * Portobello * Raheny * Ranelagh * Rathcoole * Rathfarnham * Rathgar * Rathmichael * Rathmines * Rialto * Ringsend * Rush * Saggart * Sallynoggin * Sandycove * Sandyford * Sandymount * Santry * Shankill * Skerries * Smithfield * Stepaside * Stillorgan * Stoneybatter * Sutton * Swords * Tallaght * Templeogue * Terenure * The Coombe * Tyrrelstown * Walkinstown * Whitechurch 
 birthplace = notableinstruments = Christine Lavin ( born January 2 , 1952 ) is a New York City-based singer-songwriter and promoter of contemporary folk music . She has recorded numerous solo albums , and has also recorded with other female folk artists under the name Four Bitchin ' Babes . She has also put together several compilation albums of contemporary folk artists , including her latest ' ' Just One Angel ' ' , 22 singer/songwriters singing **30;600955;TOOLONG Year 's songs including actor Jeff Daniels , Grammy-winners Janis Ian and Julie Gold , and the Guitar Man Of Central Park David Ippolito . She is known for her sense of humor , which is expressed in both her music and her onstage performances . Many of her songs alternate between emotional reflections on romance and outright comedy . Two of her more famous songs are Sensitive New Age Guys and Bald Headed Men . One of Lavin 's songs , Regretting What I Said to You When You Called Me 11:00 On a Friday Morning to Tell Me that at 1:00 Friday Afternoon You 're Gon na Leave Go Out to the Airport to Catch a Plane to Go Skiing in the Alps for Two Weeks , Not that I Wanted to Go With You , I Was n't Able to Leave Town , I 'm Not a Very Good Skier , I Could n't Expect You to Pay My Way , But After Going Out With You for Three Years I DO N'T Like Surprises ! ! Subtitled : A Musical Apology is notable for having the longest known song title . It is the eighth song on her 1984 album ' ' Future Fossils ' ' , and is 3:04 ( 3 minutes and 4 seconds ) long . In her youth , Lavin was a cheerleader in Peekskill , New York , and she still has impressive baton-twirling skills ; she often ends a concert by twirling a glow-in-the-dark baton with the house lights turned off as she leaves the stage . Lavin worked at Caffe Lena in Saratoga , New York , until Dave Van Ronk convinced her to move to New York City and make a career as a singer-songwriter . She followed his has lived in the City ever since . Lavin was the original host of ' ' Sunday Breakfast ' ' on WFUV in New York City . Lavin was a founding member of the Four Bitchin ' Babes when they were formed in 1990 . In recent years Lavin has been known to host knitting circles before her shows , inviting any knitters , hookers ( people who crochet ) , or other crafters to join her . # Awards # * The ASCAP 43rd Annual Deems Taylor Award for her book ' ' Cold Pizza For Breakfast : A Mem-Wha ? ? ' ' , 2011 * The ASCAP Foundation Jamie deRoy and Friends Award , 2010 * Top 100 of the Most Influential Artists in the Last 15 Years , ' ' Singer Songwriter Magazine ' ' * Top 30 iPod Singer/Songwriters of Choice , WUMB , Boston 2006 * ASCAP Composer Award 1992 , 1993 , 1996 , 1998 , 1999 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 * Singer/Songwriter of the Year , ' ' Back Stage Magazine ' ' , NYC 2001 * Honorable Mention , NAIRD ' ' Please Do nt Make Me Too Happy ' ' * New York Music Award Folk Artist of the Year 1990 , 1992 * World Folk Music Association Kate Wolf Memorial Award 1990 * NAIRD Folk Album of the Year , 1988 : ' ' Good Thing He Cant Read My Mind ' ' # Discography # * ' ' Absolutely Live ' ' ( 1981 ; re-issued by Winthrop , 2000 ) * ' ' Future Fossils ' ' ( Philo , 1984 ) * ' ' Beau Woes and Other Problems of Modern Life ' ' ( Philo , 1986 ) * ' ' Another Woman 's Man ' ' ( Philo , 1987 ) * ' ' Good Thing He Ca n't Read My Mind ' ' ( Philo , 1988 ) * ' ' Attainable Love ' ' ( Philo , 1990 ) * ' ' Compass ' ' ( Philo , 1991 ) * ' ' Live at the Cactus Cafe : What Was I Thinking ? ' ' ( Philo , 1993 ) * ' ' Please Do n't Make Me Too Happy ' My Flashlight on the Moon ' ' ( Shanachie , 1997 ) * ' ' One Wild Night in Concert ' ' ( 1998 ) * ' ' Getting in Touch With My Inner Bitch ' ' ( Christine Lavin , 1999 ) * ' ' The Bellevue Years ' ' ( Philo , 2000 ) * ' ' The Subway Series ' ' ( Christine Lavin , 2001 ) * ' ' Final Exam ' ' ( 2001 ) * ' ' I Was in Love With a Difficult Man ' ' ( Redwing , 2002 ) * ' ' The Runaway Christmas Tree ' ' ( 2003 ) * ' ' Sometimes Mother Really Does Know Best Live ' ' ( Appleseed , 2004 ) * ' ' Folkzinger ' ' ( Appleseed , 2005 ) * ' ' Happydance of the Xenophobe ' ' ( 2007 ) * ' ' I Do n't Make This Stuff Up , I Just Make It Rhyme ' ' ( 2008 ) * ' ' Cold Pizza for Breakfast ' ' ( Yellow Tail Records , 2009 ) 
 Edvard Hagerup Grieg ( ; 15 June 1843 4 September 1907 ) was a Norwegian composer and pianist . He is widely considered one of the leading Romantic era composers , and his music is part of the standard classical repertoire worldwide . His use and development of Norwegian folk music in his own compositions put the music of Norway in the international spectrum , as well as helping develop a national identity , much as Jean Sibelius and Antonn Dvok did in Finland and Bohemia respectively . # Biography # Edvard Hagerup Grieg was born in Bergen , Norway , on 15 June 1843 . His parents were Alexander Grieg ( 18061875 ) , a merchant and vice-consul in Bergen ; and Gesine Judithe Hagerup ( 18141875 ) , a music teacher and daughter of Edvard Hagerup . The family name , originally spelled Greig , has Scottish origins . After the Battle of Culloden in 1746 , Grieg 's great-grandfather , Alexander Greig , traveled widely , settling in Norway about 1770 , and establishing business interests in Bergen . Edvard Grieg was raised in a and taught him to play at the age of six . Grieg studied in several schools , including Tanks Upper School , Tanks School and the N.P.S , Norwegian Private School . In the summer of 1858 , Grieg met the eminent Norwegian violinist Ole Bull , who was a family friend ; Bull 's brother was married to Grieg 's aunt . Bull recognized the 15-year-old boy 's talent and persuaded his parents to send him to the Leipzig Conservatory , the piano department of which was directed by Ignaz Moscheles . Grieg enrolled in the conservatory , concentrating on the piano , and enjoyed the many concerts and recitals given in Leipzig . He disliked the discipline of the conservatory course of study . An exception was the organ , which was mandatory for piano students . In the spring of 1860 , he survived a life-threatening lung disease , pleurisy and tuberculosis . Throughout his life , Grieg 's health was impaired by a destroyed left lung and considerable deformity of his thoracic spine . He suffered from numerous respiratory infections , and ultimately developed combined lung and and sanatoria both in Norway and abroad . Several of his doctors became his personal friends . In 1861 , Grieg made his debut as a concert pianist in Karlshamn , Sweden . In 1862 , he finished his studies in Leipzig and held his first concert in his home town , where his programme included Beethoven 's ' ' Pathtique ' ' sonata . In 1863 , Grieg went to Copenhagen , Denmark , and stayed there for three years . He met the Danish composers J. P. E. Hartmann and Niels Gade . He also met his fellow Norwegian composer Rikard Nordraak ( composer of the Norwegian national anthem ) , who became a good friend and source of inspiration . Nordraak died in 1866 , and Grieg composed a funeral march in his honor . On 11 June 1867 , Grieg married his first cousin , Nina Hagerup . The next year , their only child , Alexandra , was born . Alexandra died in 1869 from meningitis . In the summer of 1868 , Grieg wrote his Piano Concerto in A minor while on holiday in Denmark 3 April 1869 in the Casino Theater in Copenhagen . Grieg himself was unable to be there due to conducting commitments in Christiania ( as Oslo was then named ) . In 1868 , Franz Liszt , who had not yet met Grieg , wrote a testimonial for him to the Norwegian Ministry of Education , which led to Grieg 's obtaining a travel grant . The two men met in Rome in 1870 . On Grieg 's first visit , they went over Grieg 's Violin Sonata No. 1 , which pleased Liszt greatly . On his second visit , in April , Grieg brought with him the manuscript of his Piano Concerto , which Liszt proceeded to sightread ( including the orchestral arrangement ) . Liszt 's rendition greatly impressed his audience , although Grieg gently pointed out to him that he played the first movement too quickly . Liszt also gave Grieg some advice on orchestration , ( for example , to give the melody of the second theme in the first movement to a solo trumpet ) . In 187476 , Grieg composed incidental music for the ' ' , at the request of the author . Grieg had close ties with the Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra ( Harmonien ) , and later became Music Director of the orchestra from 1880 to 1882 . In 1888 , Grieg met Tchaikovsky in Leipzig . Grieg was struck by the sadness in Tchaikovsky. cite web Grieg was awarded two honorary doctorates , first by Cambridge University in 1894 and the next from Oxford University in 1906. # Later years # The Norwegian government provided him with a pension . In the spring 1903 , Grieg made nine 78-rpm gramophone recordings of his piano music in Paris ; all of these historic discs have been reissued on both LPs and CDs , despite limited fidelity . Grieg also made live-recording player piano music rolls for the Hupfeld Phonola piano-player system and Welte-Mignon reproducing system , all of which survive today and can be heard . He also worked with the Aeolian Company for its ' Autograph Metrostyle ' piano roll series wherein he indicated the tempo mapping for many of his pieces . In 1906 , he met the composer and pianist of Grieg 's music and a strong empathy was quickly established . In a 1907 interview , Grieg stated : I have written Norwegian Peasant Dances that no one in my country can play , and here comes this Australian who plays them as they ought to be played ! He is a genius that we Scandinavians can not do other than love . Edvard Grieg died in the late summer of 1907 , aged 64 , after a long period of illness . His final words were Well , if it must be so . The funeral drew between 30,000 and 40,000 people out on the streets of his home town to honor him . Following his wish , his own ' ' Funeral March in Memory of Rikard Nordraak ' ' was played in an orchestration by his friend Johan Halvorsen , who had married Grieg 's niece . In addition , the ' ' Funeral March ' ' movement from Chopin 's Piano Sonata No. 2 was played . Grieg was cremated , and his ashes were entombed in a mountain crypt near his house , Troldhaugen . . Edvard Grieg and his wife considered themselves Unitarians and Nina went to the Unitarian church in Copenhagen after his death . # Music # Some of Grieg 's early works include a symphony ( which he later suppressed ) and a piano sonata . He also wrote three violin sonatas and a cello sonata . Grieg also composed the incidental music for Henrik Ibsen 's play , Peer Gynt - which includes the famous excerpt entitled , In the Hall of the Mountain King . In this piece of music , the adventures of the anti-hero , Peer Gynt , are related , including the episode in which he steals a bride at her wedding . The angry guests chase him , and Peer falls , hitting his head on a rock . He wakes up in a mountain surrounded by trolls . The music of In the Hall of the Mountain King represents the angry trolls taunting Peer and gets louder each time the theme repeats . The music ends with Peer escaping from the mountain . In an 1874 letter to his friend Frants Beyer , Grieg expressed , one of the movement he composed for Peer Gynt , writing I have also written something for the scene in the hall of the mountain King something that I literally ca n't bear listening to because it absolutely reeks of cow-pies , exaggerated Norwegian nationalism , and trollish self-satisfaction ! But I have a hunch that the irony will be discernible . Grieg 's ' ' Holberg Suite ' ' was originally written for the piano , and later arranged by the composer for string orchestra . Grieg wrote songs in which he set lyrics by poets Heinrich Heine , Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , Henrik Ibsen , Hans Christian Andersen , Rudyard Kipling and others . Russian composer Nikolai Myaskovsky used a theme by Grieg for the variations with which he closed his Third String Quartet . Norwegian pianist Eva Knardahl recorded the composer 's complete piano music during 1978 and 1980 . The recordings were reissued in 2006 on 12 compact discs by BIS Records . Grieg himself recorded many of these piano works before his death in 1907. # List of selected works # *Piano Sonata in F major , Op. 8 *Concert Overture ' ' In Autumn ' ' , Op. 11 *Violin Sonata No. 2 in G major , Op. 13 *Piano Concerto in A minor , Op. 16 *Incidental music to Bjrnstjerne Bjrnson 's play ' ' Sigurd Jorsalfar ' ' , Op. 22 *Incidental music to Henrik Ibsen 's play ' ' Peer Gynt ' ' , Op. 23 * ' ' Ballade in the Form of Variations on a Norwegian Folk Song ' ' in g minor , Op. 24 *String Quartet in G minor , Op. 27 * ' ' Album for Male Chorus ' ' , Op. 30 * ' ' Two Elegiac Melodies for Strings ' ' , Op. 34 *Four ' ' Norwegian Dances ' ' for piano four hands , Op. 35 ( later orchestrated ) *Cello Sonata in A minor , Op. 36 * ' ' Holberg Suite ' ' for piano , later arr. for string orchestra , Op. 40 *Violin Sonata No. 3 in C minor , Op. 45 * ' ' Peer Gynt ' ' Suite No. 1 , Op. 46 * ' ' orchestration of four ' ' Lyric Pieces ' ' ) * ' ' Peer Gynt ' ' Suite No. 2 , Op. 55 *Suite from ' ' Sigurd Jorsalfar ' ' , Op. 56 *Four ' ' Symphonic Dances ' ' for piano , later arr. for orchestra , Op. 64 * ' ' Haugtussa ' ' Song Cycle after Arne Garborg , Op. 67 * ' ' Sltter ' ' ( Peasant Dances ) for piano , Op. 72 *Sixty-six ' ' Lyric Pieces ' ' for piano in ten books , Opp. 12 , 38 , 43 , 47 , 54 , 57 , 62 , 65 , 68 and 71 , including : ' ' Arietta ' ' , ' ' To the Spring ' ' , ' ' Little Bird ' ' , ' ' Butterfly ' ' , ' ' Notturno ' ' , ' ' Wedding Day at Troldhaugen ' ' , ' ' At Your Feet ' ' , ' ' Longing For Home ' ' , ' ' March of the Dwarfs ' ' , ' ' Pome rotique ' ' and ' 
 In traditional belief and fiction , a ghost ( sometimes known as a spectre ( British English ) or specter ( American English ) , phantom , apparition or spook ) is the soul or spirit of a dead person or animal that can appear , in visible form or other manifestation , to the living . Descriptions of the apparition of ghosts vary widely from an invisible presence to translucent or barely visible wispy shapes , to realistic , lifelike visions . The deliberate attempt to contact the spirit of a deceased person is known as necromancy , or in spiritism as a ' ' sance ' ' . The belief in manifestations of the spirits of the dead is widespread , dating back to animism or ancestor worship in pre-literate cultures . Certain religious practicesfuneral rites , exorcisms , and some practices of spiritualism and ritual magicare specifically designed to rest the spirits of the dead . Ghosts are generally described as solitary essences that haunt particular locations , objects , or people they were associated with in life , though stories of phantom armies , have also been recounted . The synonym ' ' spook ' ' is a Dutch loanword , akin to Low German ' ' spk ' ' ( of uncertain etymology ) ; it entered the English language via the United States in the 19th century . Alternative words in modern usage include ' ' spectre ' ' ( from Latin ' ' spectrum ' ' ) , the Scottish ' ' wraith ' ' ( of obscure origin ) , ' ' phantom ' ' ( via French ultimately from Greek ' ' phantasma ' ' , compare ' ' fantasy ' ' ) and ' ' apparition ' ' . The term ' ' shade ' ' in classical mythology translates Greek , or Latin ' ' umbra ' ' , in reference to the notion of spirits in the Greek underworld . Haint is a synonym for ghost used in regional English of the southern United States , and the haint tale is a common feature of southern oral and literary tradition . The term ' ' poltergeist ' ' is a German word , literally a noisy ghost moving and influencing objects . An association with the verb ' ' writhe ' ' was the etymology favored by J. R. R. Tolkien . Tolkien 's use of the word in the naming of the creatures known as the Ringwraiths has influenced later usage in fantasy literature . Bogey or ' ' bogy/bogie ' ' is a term for a ghost , and appears in Scottish poet John Mayne 's ' ' Hallowe'en ' ' in 1780 . A ' ' revenant ' ' is a deceased person returning from the dead to haunt the living , either as a disembodied ghost or alternatively as an animated ( undead ) corpse . Also related is the concept of a fetch , the visible ghost or spirit of a person yet alive . # Typology # # Anthropological context # A notion of the transcendent , supernatural or numinous , usually involving entities like ghosts , demons or deities , is a cultural universal . In pre-literate folk religions , these beliefs are often summarized under animism and ancestor worship . In many cultures malignant , restless ghosts are distinguished from worship typically involves rites intended to prevent revenants , vengeful spirits of the dead , imagined as starving and envious of the living . Strategies for preventing revenants may either include sacrifice , i.e. , giving the dead food and drink to pacify them , or magical banishment of the deceased to force them not to return . Ritual feeding of the dead is performed in traditions like the Chinese Ghost Festival or the Western All Souls ' Day . Magical banishment of the dead is present in many of the world 's burial customs . The bodies found in many tumuli ( kurgan ) had been ritually bound before burial , and the custom of binding the dead persists , for example , in rural Anatolia . Nineteenth-century anthropologist James Frazer stated in his classic work , ' ' The Golden Bough ' ' , that souls were seen as the creature within that animated the body . # Ghosts and the afterlife # Although the human soul was sometimes symbolically or literally depicted in ancient cultures as a bird or other animal , it appears to have been widely body in every feature , even down to clothing the person wore . This is depicted in artwork from various ancient cultures , including such works as the ' ' Egyptian Book of the Dead ' ' , which shows deceased people in the afterlife appearing much as they did before death , including the style of dress . # Fear of ghosts # While deceased ancestors are universally regarded as venerable , and often imagined as having a continued presence in some sort of afterlife , the spirit of a deceased person which remains present in the material world ( viz. a ghost ) is regarded as an unnatural or undesirable state of affairs and the idea of ghosts or revenants is associated with a reaction of fear . This is universally the case in pre-modern folk cultures , but fear of ghosts also remains an integral aspect of the modern ghost story , Gothic horror , and other horror fiction dealing with the supernatural . # Common attributes # Another widespread belief concerning ghosts is that they are composed of a misty , airy , or subtle material . the person within the person ( the person 's spirit ) , most noticeable in ancient cultures as a person 's breath , which upon exhaling in colder climates appears visibly as a white mist . This belief may have also fostered the metaphorical meaning of breath in certain languages , such as the Latin ' ' spiritus ' ' and the Greek ' ' pneuma ' ' , which by analogy became extended to mean the soul . In the Bible , God is depicted as synthesising Adam , as a living soul , from the dust of the Earth and the breath of God . In many traditional accounts , ghosts were often thought to be deceased people looking for vengeance ( vengeful ghosts ) , or imprisoned on earth for bad things they did during life . The appearance of a ghost has often been regarded as an omen or portent of death . Seeing one 's own ghostly double or fetch is a related omen of death . White ladies were reported to appear in many rural areas , and supposed to have died tragically or suffered the world . Common to many of them is the theme of losing or being betrayed by a husband or fianc . They are often associated with an individual family line or regarded as a harbinger of death similar to a banshee . Legends of ghost ships have existed since the 18th century ; most notable of these is the ' ' Flying Dutchman ' ' . This theme has been used in literature in ' ' The Rime of the Ancient Mariner ' ' by Coleridge . # Locale # A place where ghosts are reported is described as haunted , and often seen as being inhabited by spirits of deceased who may have been former residents or were familiar with the property . Supernatural activity inside homes is said to be mainly associated with violent or tragic events in the building 's past such as murder , accidental death , or suicide sometimes in the recent or ancient past . But not all hauntings are at a place of a violent death , or even on violent grounds . Many cultures and religions believe the essence of a being exist . Some religious views argue that the ' spirits ' of those who have died have not ' passed over ' and are trapped inside the property where their memories and energy are strong . # History # # Ancient Near East and Egypt # **33;8401;!-- **401;8436;!-- There are many references to ghosts in Mesopotamian religions the religions of Sumer , Babylon , Assyria and other early states in Mesopotamia . Traces of these beliefs survive in the later Abrahamic religions that came to dominate the region . The 5th-century BC play ' ' Oresteia ' ' contains one of the first ghosts to appear in a work of fiction . # #Roman Empire and Late Antiquity# # The ancient Romans believed a ghost could be used to exact revenge on an enemy by scratching a curse on a piece of lead or pottery and placing it into a grave . Plutarch , in the 1st century AD , described the haunting of the baths at Chaeronea by the ghost of a murdered man . The ghosts loud and frightful groans caused the people of the town to seal up a haunted house from the ancient classical world is given by Pliny the Younger ( c. 50 AD ) . Pliny describes the haunting of a house in Athens by a ghost bound in chains . The hauntings ceased when the ghost 's shackled skeleton was unearthed , and given a proper reburial . The writers Plautus and Lucian also wrote stories about haunted houses . In the New Testament , Jesus has to persuade the Disciples that he is not a ghost following the resurrection , Luke 24:3739 ( some versions of the Bible , such as the KJV and NKJV , use the term spirit ) . In a similar vein , Jesus ' followers at first believe him to be a ghost ( spirit ) when they see him walking on water . One of the first persons to express disbelief in ghosts was Lucian of Samosata in the 2nd century AD . In his tale The Doubter ( circa 150 AD ) he relates how Democritus the learned man from Abdera in Thrace lived in a tomb outside the city gates to prove that cemeteries were not how he persisted in his disbelief despite practical jokes perpetrated by some young men of Abdera who dressed up in black robes with skull masks to frighten him . This account by Lucian notes something about the popular classical expectation of how a ghost should look . In the 5th century AD , the Christian priest Constantius of Lyon recorded an instance of the recurring theme of the improperly buried dead who come back to haunt the living , and who can only cease their haunting when their bones have been discovered and properly reburied. # Middle Ages # Ghosts reported in medieval Europe tended to fall into two categories : the souls of the dead , or demons . The souls of the dead returned for a specific purpose . Demonic ghosts were those which existed only to torment or tempt the living . The living could tell them apart by demanding their purpose in the name of Jesus Christ . The soul of a dead person would divulge their mission , while a demonic ghost would be banished at the sound of the Holy Name . Most ghosts were to atone for their transgressions in life . Their penance was generally related to their sin . For example , the ghost of a man who had been abusive to his servants was condemned to tear off and swallow bits of his own tongue ; the ghost of another man , who had neglected to leave his cloak to the poor , was condemned to wear the cloak , now heavy as a church tower . These ghosts appeared to the living to ask for prayers to end their suffering . Other dead souls returned to urge the living to confess their sins before their own deaths . Medieval European ghosts were more substantial than ghosts described in the Victorian age , and there are accounts of ghosts being wrestled with and physically restrained until a priest could arrive to hear its confession . Some were less solid , and could move through walls . Often they were described as paler and sadder versions of the person they had been while alive , and dressed in tattered gray rags . The vast majority of reported sightings were male . There were night in the forest , or in the remains of an Iron Age hillfort , as at Wandlebury , near Cambridge , England . Living knights were sometimes challenged to single combat by phantom knights , which vanished when defeated . From the medieval period an apparition of a ghost is recorded from 1211 , at the time of the Albigensian Crusade . Gervase of Tilbury , Marshal of Arles , wrote that the image of Guilhem , a boy recently murdered in the forest , appeared in his cousin 's home in Beaucaire , near Avignon . This series of visits lasted all of the summer . Through his cousin , who spoke for him , the boy allegedly held conversations with anyone who wished , until the local priest requested to speak to the boy directly , leading to an extended disquisition on theology . The boy narrated the trauma of death and the unhappiness of his fellow souls in Purgatory , and reported that God was most pleased with the ongoing Crusade against the Cathar heretics , launched three years earlier . The time of the Albigensian Crusade , this constant bloodshed and dislocation of populations being the context for these reported visits by the murdered boy . Haunted houses are featured in the 9th-century ' ' Arabian Nights ' ' ( such as the tale of ' ' Ali the Cairene and the Haunted House in Baghdad ' ' ) . # European Renaissance to Romanticism # Renaissance magic took a revived interest in the occult , including necromancy . In the era of the Reformation and Counter Reformation , there was frequently a backlash against unwholesome interest in the dark arts , typified by writers such as Thomas Erastus . The Swiss Reformed pastor Ludwig Lavater supplied one of the most frequently reprinted books of the period with his ' ' Of Ghosts and Spirits Walking By Night . ' ' The Child ballad Sweet William 's Ghost ( 1868 ) recounts the story of a ghost returning to his fiance begging her to free him from his promise to marry her . He can not marry her because he is dead but her refusal would mean his damnation . This reflects a popular British belief that a new love without some formal release . The Unquiet Grave expresses a belief even more widespread , found in various locations over Europe : ghosts can stem from the excessive grief of the living , whose mourning interferes with the dead 's peaceful rest . In many folktales from around the world , the hero arranges for the burial of a dead man . Soon after , he gains a companion who aids him and , in the end , the hero 's companion reveals that he is in fact the dead man . Instances of this include the Italian fairy tale Fair Brow and the Swedish The Bird ' Grip ' . # Modern period of western culture # # #Spiritualist movement# # ----- EDITORIAL NOTE ----- -- **379;8839;!-- Spiritualism is a monotheistic belief system or religion , postulating a belief in God , but with a distinguishing feature of belief that spirits of the dead residing in the spirit world can be contacted by mediums , who can then provide information about the afterlife . By 1897 , it was said to have more than eight million followers the middle and upper classes , while the corresponding movement in continental Europe and Latin America is known as Spiritism . The religion flourished for a half century without canonical texts or formal organization , attaining cohesion by periodicals , tours by trance lecturers , camp meetings , and the missionary activities of accomplished mediums . Many prominent Spiritualists were women . Most followers supported causes such as the abolition of slavery and women 's suffrage . By the late 1880s , credibility of the informal movement weakened , due to accusations of fraud among mediums , and formal Spiritualist organizations began to appear . Spiritualism is currently practiced primarily through various denominational Spiritualist Churches in the United States and United Kingdom . # #Spiritism# # ---- EDITORIAL NOTE ---- -- **376;9220;!-- Spiritism , or French spiritualism , is based on the five books of the Spiritist Codification written by French educator Hypolite Lon Denizard Rivail under the pseudonym Allan Kardec reporting sances in which he observed a series of phenomena that he attributed to incorporeal intelligence ( spirits ) . His assumption of spirit communication was validated by many contemporaries and studied the phenomena . His work was later extended by writers like Leon Denis , Arthur Conan Doyle , Camille Flammarion , Ernesto Bozzano , Chico Xavier , Divaldo Pereira Franco , Waldo Vieira , Johannes Greber and others . Spiritism has adherents in many countries throughout the world , including Spain , United States , Canada , Japan , Germany , France , England , Argentina , Portugal and especially Brazil , which has the largest proportion and greatest number of followers . # Scientific view # The physician John Ferriar wrote ' ' An essay towards a theory of apparitions ' ' in 1813 in which he argued that sightings of ghosts were the result of optical illusions . Later the French physician Alexandre Jacques Franois Brire de Boismont published ' ' On Hallucinations : Or , the Rational History of Apparitions , Dreams , Ecstasy , Magnetism , and Somnambulism ' ' in 1845 in which he claimed sightings of ghosts were the result of hallucinations . David Turner , a retired physical chemist , suggested that ball lightning could cause inanimate objects to move erratically . that there was no credible scientific evidence that any location was inhabited by spirits of the dead . According to research in anomalistic psychology visions of ghosts may arise from hypnagogic hallucinations ( waking dreams which are experienced in the transitional states to and from sleep ) . In a study of two experiments into alleged hauntings ( Wiseman ' ' et al ' ' . 2003 ) came to the conclusion that people consistently report unusual experiences in haunted areas because of environmental factors , which may differ across locations . Some of these factors included the variance of local magnetic fields , size of location and lighting level stimuli of which witnesses may not be consciously aware . Some researchers , such as Michael Persinger of Laurentian University , Canada , have speculated that changes in geomagnetic fields ( created , e.g. , by tectonic stresses in the Earth 's crust or solar activity ) could stimulate the brain 's temporal lobes and produce many of the experiences associated with hauntings . Sound is thought to be another cause of supposed sightings . Richard Lord and Richard Wiseman have in a room , such as anxiety , extreme sorrow , a feeling of being watched , or even the chills . Carbon monoxide poisoning , which can cause changes in perception of the visual and auditory systems , was speculated upon as a possible explanation for haunted houses as early as 1921. # By religion # # Judo-Christian # The Hebrew Torah and the Bible contain a few references to ghosts , associating spiritism with forbidden occult activities . The most notable reference is in the First Book of Samuel , in which a disguised King Saul has the Witch of Endor summon the spirit/ghost of Samuel . In the New Testament , Jesus has to persuade the Disciples that He is not a ghost following the resurrection , Luke 24:3739 ( some versions of the Bible , such as the KJV and NKJV , use the term spirit ) . Similarly , Jesus ' followers at first believe Him to be a ghost ( spirit ) when they see him walking on water . Most of the Christian Church Some ghosts are actually said to be demons in disguise Timothy 4:1 , that they come to deceive people and draw them away from God and into bondage . As a result , attempts to contact the dead may lead to unwanted contact with a demon or an unclean spirit , as was said to occur in the case of Robbie Mannheim , a fourteen-year-old Maryland youth . The Seventh-Day Adventist view is that a soul is not equivalent to spirit or ghost ( depending on the Bible version ) , and that save for the Holy Spirit , all spirits/ghosts are demons in disguise . Furthermore , they teach that in accordance with ( Genesis 2:7 , Ecclesiastes 12:7 ) , there are only two components to a soul , neither of which survives death - with each returning to its respective source . Christadelphians reject the view of a living , conscious soul after death . The Talmud tells of a being called a shade that is similar to other creatures in that it lives and dies but consists only of a form but lacks matter that forms mass , thus rendering it invisible . Since it has no end of the world to the other . # Islam # According to Islamic teachings , there are no such thing as ghosts . Muslims believe that ' Ghosts ' are in fact jinns . The Koran discusses spirits known as jinns. # Buddhism # In Buddhism , there are a number of planes of existence into which a person can be reborn , one of which is the realm of hungry ghosts . # By culture # # African folklore # The Humr people of Sudan consume the drink Umm Nyolokh ; which is created from the liver and marrow of giraffes . Umm Nyolokh often contains DMT and other psychoactive substances from plants the giraffes eat such as Acacia ; and is known to cause hallucinations of giraffes , believed to be the giraffes ghosts by the Humr. # European folklore # Belief in ghosts in European folklore is characterized by the recurring fear of returning or ' ' revenant ' ' deceased who may harm the living . This includes the Scandinavian ' ' gjenganger ' ' , the Romanian ' ' strigoi ' ' , the Serbian vrykolakas ' ' , etc . In Scandinavian and Finnish tradition , ghosts appear in corporeal form and their supernatural nature is given away by behavior rather than appearance . In fact , in many stories they are first mistaken for the living . They may be mute , appear and disappear suddenly , or leave no footprints or other traces . British folklore is particularly notable for its numerous haunted locations . Belief in the soul and an afterlife remained near universal until the emergence of atheism in the 18th century . In the 19th century , spiritism resurrected belief in ghosts as the object of systematic inquiry , and popular opinion in Western culture remains divided . # South and Southeast Asia # # #India# # -- **378;9598;!-- A ' ' bhoot ' ' or ' ' bhut ' ' ( , , or ) is a supernatural creature , usually the ghost of a deceased person , in the popular culture , literature and some ancient texts of the Indian subcontinent . Interpretations of how ' ' bhoot ' ' s come into existence vary by region and and restless due to some factor that prevents them from moving on ( to transmigration , non-being , nirvana , or heaven or hell , depending on tradition ) . This could be a violent death , unsettled matters in their lives , or simply the failure of their survivors to perform proper funerals . In Central and Northern India , ' ' Aojha ' ' spirit guides play a central role . It duly happens when in the night someone sleeps and decorates something on the wall and they say that if one sees the spirit the next thing in the morning he will become a spirit to and that to a skondho kata which means a spirit without a head and the soul of the body will remain the dark with the dark lord from the spirits who reside in the body of every human in Central and Northern India . It is also believed that if someone calls one from behind never turn back and see because the spirit may catch the human to make it a spirit . Other types of spirits in Hindu Mythology include Baital possession of corpses , and Pishacha , a type of flesh-eating demon . # #Austronesia# # -- **378;9978;!-- There are many Malay ghost myths , remnants of old animist beliefs that have been shaped by later Hindu , Buddhist and Muslim influences in the modern states of Indonesia , Malaysia and Brunei . Some ghost concepts such as the female vampires Pontianak and Penanggalan are shared throughout the region . Ghosts are a popular theme in modern Malaysian and Indonesian films . There are also many references to Ghosts in Filipino culture , ranging from ancient legendary creatures such as the Manananggal and Tiyanak to more modern urban legends and horror films . The beliefs , legends and stories are as diverse as the people of the Philippines . There was widespread belief in ghosts in Polynesian culture , some of which persists today . After death , a person 's ghost normally traveled to the sky world or the underworld , but some could stay on earth . In many Polynesian legends , ghosts were often actively involved in the affairs of the living . Ghosts might also cause sickness be driven out through strong medicines . Phi Hua Kat , Phi Pop , Phi Phong , Phi Phraya and Mae Nak has its origins in Thai films that have now become classics . The most feared spirit in Thailand is Phi Tai Hong , the ghost of a person who has died suddenly of a violent death . The folklore of Thailand also includes the belief that sleep paralysis is caused by a ghost , Phi Am. # #Tibet# # ---- EDITORIAL NOTE ---- -- **378;10358;!-- There is widespread belief in ghosts in Tibetan culture . Ghosts are explicitly recognized in the Tibetan Buddhist religion as they were in Indian Buddhism , occupying a distinct but overlapping world to the human one , and feature in many traditional legends . When a human dies , after a period of uncertainty they may enter the ghost world . A hungry ghost ( Tibetan : ' ' yidag ' ' , ' ' yi-dvags ' ' ; Sanskrit : ' ' preta ' ' , ) has a tiny throat and huge stomach , and so can never be satisfied . Ghosts a spirit trap and burnt , thus releasing them to be reborn . Ghosts may also be exorcised , and an annual festival is held throughout Tibet for this purpose . Some say that Dorje Shugden , the ghost of a powerful 17th-century monk , is a deity , but the Dalai Lama asserts that he is an evil spirit , which has caused a split in the Tibetan exile community . # Americas # # #Mexico# # ---- EDITORIAL NOTE ---- -- **378;10738;!-- There is extensive and varied belief in ghosts in Mexican culture . The modern state of Mexico before the Spanish conquest was inhabited by diverse peoples such as the Maya and Aztec , and their beliefs have survived and evolved , combined with the beliefs of the Spanish colonists . The Day of the Dead incorporates pre-Columbian beliefs with Christian elements . Mexican literature and films include many stories of ghosts interacting with the living . # #United States# # According to the Gallup Poll News Service , belief in haunted houses , ghosts , communication with the dead , and witches had an especially steep increase about 32 percent of Americans believe in ghosts . # Depiction in the arts # Ghosts are prominent in the popular cultures of various nations . The ghost story is ubiquitous across all cultures from oral folktales to works of literature . # Renaissance to Romanticism ( 1500 to 1840 ) # One of the more recognizable ghosts in English literature is the shade of Hamlet 's murdered father in Shakespeares ' ' The Tragical History of Hamlet , Prince of Denmark ' ' . In ' ' Hamlet ' ' , it is the ghost who demands that Prince Hamlet investigate his murder most foul and seek revenge upon his usurping uncle , King Claudius . In Shakespeares ' ' Macbeth ' ' , the murdered Banquo returns as a ghost to the dismay of the title character . In English Renaissance theater , ghosts were often depicted in the garb of the living and even in armor , as with the ghost of Hamlets father . Armor , being out-of-date by the time of the Renaissance , gave the stage ghost a sense of antiquity . But the sheeted century because an armored ghost could not satisfactorily convey the requisite spookiness : it clanked and creaked , and had to be moved about by complicated pulley systems or elevators . These clanking ghosts being hoisted about the stage became objects of ridicule as they became clichd stage elements . Ann Jones and Peter Stallybrass , in ' ' Renaissance Clothing and the Materials of Memory ' ' , point out , In fact , it is as laughter increasingly threatens the Ghost that he starts to be staged not in armor but in some form of ' spirit drapery ' . An interesting observation by Jones and Stallybrass is that Ghosts figured prominently in traditional British ballads of the 16th and 17th centuries , particularly the Border Ballads of the turbulent border country between England and Scotland . Ballads of this type include ' ' The Unquiet Grave ' ' , ' ' The Wife of Usher 's Well ' ' , and ' ' Sweet William 's Ghost ' ' , which feature the recurring theme of returning dead lovers or children . In the ballad ' ' King kings horse and hounds before forcing the king into bed . The king then awakens to find the ghost transformed into a beautiful woman . One of the key early appearances by ghosts in a gothic tale was ' ' The Castle of Otranto ' ' by Horace Walpole in 1764 . Washington Irving 's short story ' ' The Legend of Sleepy Hollow ' ' ( 1820 ) , based on an earlier German folktale , features a Headless Horseman . It has been adapted for film and television many times , such as ' ' Sleepy Hollow ' ' , a successful 1999 feature film . # Victorian/Edwardian ( 1840 to 1920 ) # The classic ghost story arose during the Victorian period , and included authors such as M. R. James , Sheridan Le Fanu , Violet Hunt , and Henry James . Classic ghost stories were influenced by the gothic fiction tradition , and contain elements of folklore and psychology . M. R. James summed up the essential elements of a ghost story as , Malevolence and terror , the glare of evil faces , the stony , and ' long-drawn , distant screams ' , are all in place , and so is a modicum of blood , shed with deliberation and carefully husbanded ... . Famous literary apparitions from this period are the ghosts of ' ' A Christmas Carol ' ' , in which Ebenezer Scrooge is helped to see the error of his ways by the ghost of his former colleague Jacob Marley , and the ghosts of Christmas Past , Christmas Present and Christmas Yet to Come . Oscar Wilde 's comedy ' ' The Canterville Ghost ' ' has been adapted for film and television on several occasions . Henry James 's ' ' The Turn of the Screw ' ' has also appeared in a number of adaptations , notably the film ' ' The Innocents ' ' and Benjamin Britten 's opera ' ' The Turn of the Screw ' ' . Oscar Telgmann 's opera ' ' Leo , the Royal Cadet ' ' ( 1885 ) includes ' ' Judge 's Song ' ' about a ghost at the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston , Ontario Things ' ' is a 1904 collection of Japanese ghost stories collected by Lafcadio Hearn , and later made into a film . In the United States , prior to and during the First World War , folklorists Olive Dame Campbell and Cecil Sharp collected ballads from the people of the Appalachian Mountains , which included ghostly themes such as ' ' The Wife of Usher 's Well ' ' , ' ' The Suffolk Miracle ' ' , ' ' The Unquiet Grave ' ' , and ' ' The Cruel Ship 's Carpenter ' ' . The theme of these ballads was often the return of a dead lover . These songs were variants of traditional British ballads handed down by generations of mountaineers descended from the people of the Anglo-Scottish border region . # Modern Era ( 1920 to 1970 ) # Professional parapsychologists and ghosts hunters , such as Harry Price , active in the 1920s and 1930s , and Peter Underwood , active in the 1940s and 1950s , published accounts of their experiences with ostensibly true ghost stories such as Price 's ' ' The 's ' ' Ghosts of Borley ' ' ( both recounting experiences at Borley Rectory ) . The writer Frank Edwards delved into ghost stories in his books of his , like Stranger than Science . Childrens benevolent ghost stories became popular , such as Casper the Friendly Ghost , created in the 1930s and appearing in comics , animated cartoons , and eventually a 1995 feature film . Nol Coward 's play ' ' Blithe Spirit ' ' , later made into a film , places a more humorous slant on the phenomenon of haunting of individuals and specific locations . With the advent of motion pictures and television , screen depictions of ghosts became common , and spanned a variety of genres ; the works of Shakespeare , Dickens and Wilde have all been made into cinematic versions . Novel-length tales have been difficult to adapt to cinema , although that of ' ' The Haunting of Hill House ' ' to ' ' The Haunting ' ' in 1963 is an exception . Sentimental depictions during this period were more popular in cinema than horror , and include ' ' , which was later adapted to television with a successful 196870 TV series . Genuine psychological horror films from this period include 1944 's ' ' The Uninvited ' ' , and 1945 's ' ' Dead of Night ' ' . # Post-modern ( 1970present ) # The 1970s saw screen depictions of ghosts diverge into distinct genres of the romantic and horror . A common theme in the romantic genre from this period is the ghost as a benign guide or messenger , often with unfinished business , such as 1989 's ' ' Field of Dreams ' ' , the 1990 film ' ' Ghost ' ' , and the 1993 comedy ' ' Heart and Souls ' ' . In the horror genre , 1980 's ' ' The Fog ' ' , and the ' ' A Nightmare on Elm Street ' ' series of films from the 1980s and 1990s are notable examples of the trend for the merging of ghost stories with scenes of physical violence . Popularised in such films as the 1984 comedy ' ' Ghostbusters ' ' , ghost societies to explore reportedly haunted places . The ghost hunting theme has been featured in reality television series , such as ' ' Ghost Adventures ' ' , ' ' Ghost Hunters ' ' , ' ' Ghost Hunters International ' ' , ' ' Ghost Lab ' ' , ' ' Most Haunted ' ' and ' ' A Haunting ' ' . It is also represented in children 's television by such programs as ' ' The Ghost Hunter ' ' and ' ' Ghost Trackers ' ' . Ghost hunting also gave rise to multiple guidebooks to haunted locations , and ghost hunting how-to manuals . The 1990s saw a return to classic gothic ghosts , whose dangers were more psychological than physical . Examples of films from this period include 1999 's ' ' The Sixth Sense ' ' and ' ' The Others ' ' . Asian cinema has also produced horror films about ghosts , such as the 1998 Japanese film ' ' Ringu ' ' ( remade in the US as ' ' The Ring ' ' in 2002 ) , and the Pang . Indian ghost movies are popular not just in India , but in the Middle East , Africa , South East Asia and other parts of the world . Some Indian ghost movies such as the comedy / horror film ' ' Chandramukhi ' ' have been commercial successes , dubbed into several languages . - something later echoed ( if with a less positive spin ) by C. G. Jung . Nick Harkaway considered that we all carry a host of ghosts in our heads , in the form of impressions of past acquaintances ghosts that represent our maps of other people in the world : our reference points . Object relations theory sees our personalities as formed by splitting off aspects of ourselves we find incompatible ; whereupon we may be haunted in later life by such ghosts of our alternate selves . 
 commonname = Latvia imagemap2 = Latvia - Location Map ( 2013 ) - LVA - UNOCHA.svg latd=56 latm=57 latNS=N longd=24 longm=6 longEW=E establishedevent1 = Declared <sup> b </sup> establisheddate8 = 1 May 2004 Latvia ( ; ) , officially the Republic of Latvia ( ) , is a country in the Baltic region of Northern Europe , one of the three Baltic states . It is bordered by Estonia , Lithuania , Russia , Belarus and by a maritime border to the west with Sweden . Latvia has 1,997,500 inhabitants and a territory of 64589km2 sqmi . The country has a temperate seasonal climate . Latvia is a democratic parliamentary republic established in 1918 . The capital city is Riga , the European Capital of Culture 2014 . Latvian is the official language . Latvia is a unitary state , divided into 118 administrative divisions of which 109 are municipalities and 9 are cities . There are five planning regions : Kurzeme , Latgale , Riga , Vidzeme and Zemgale . The Latvians are a Baltic people , culturally related to the Lithuanians . Latvians and Livs are language ; it and Lithuanian are the only two surviving Baltic languages . Despite foreign rule from the 13th to 20th centuries , the Latvian nation maintained its identity throughout the generations via the language and musical traditions . Latvia and Estonia share a long common history . As a consequence of the Soviet occupation both countries are home to a large number of ethnic Russians ( 26.9% in Latvia and 25.5% in Estonia ) , some of whom are non-citizens . Latvia is historically predominantly Protestant Lutheran , except for the Latgale region in the southeast , which has historically been predominantly Roman Catholic . The Republic of Latvia was founded on 18 November 1918 . However , its de facto independence was interrupted at the outset of World War II . In 1940 , the country was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union , invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany in 1941 , and re-occupied by the Soviets in 1944 to form the Latvian SSR for the next fifty years . The peaceful Singing Revolution , starting in 1987 , called for Baltic emancipation of Soviet rule . It , and Latvia declared the restoration of its de facto independence on 21 August 1991 . Latvia is a member of NATO , European Union , United Nations , Council of Europe , CBSS , IMF , NB8 , NIB , OSCE , and WTO . It is currently in the accession process for joining the OECD . For 2013 , Latvia is listed 44th on the Human Development Index and as a high income country . It used the Latvian lats as its currency until this was replaced by the euro on 1 January 2014. # Etymology # The name ' ' Latvija ' ' is derived from the name of the ancient Latgalians , one of four Indo-European Baltic tribes ( along with Couronians , Selonians and Semigallians ) , which formed the ethnic core of modern Latvians together with the Finnic Livonians. # History # Around 3000 BCE , the proto-Baltic ancestors of the Latvian people settled on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea . The Balts established trade routes to Rome and Byzantium , trading local amber for precious metals . By 900 CE , four Selonians , Semigallians ( in Latvian : ' ' kuri ' ' , ' ' latgai ' ' , ' ' si ' ' and ' ' zemgai ' ' ) , as well as the Livonians ( ' ' lbiei ' ' ) speaking a Finnic language . # The Medieval period # Although the local people had contact with the outside world for centuries , they were more fully integrated into European society in the 12th century . The first missionaries , sent by the Pope , sailed up the Daugava River in the late 12th century , seeking converts . The local people , however , did not convert to Christianity as readily as hoped . German crusaders were sent into Latvia to convert the population from their original pagan beliefs by force of arms . In the beginning of the 13th century , large parts of today 's Latvia were ruled by Germans . Together with Southern Estonia , these conquered areas formed the crusader state that became known as Terra Mariana or Livonia . In 1282 , Riga , and later the cities of Csis , Hanseatic League . and formed close cultural contacts with Western Europe . # The Reformation period # The 16th , 17th , and 18th centuries were a time of great change for the inhabitants of Latvia , including the reformation , the collapse of the Livonian state , and the time when the Latvian territory was divided up among foreign powers . After the Livonian War ( 15581583 ) , Livonia ( Latvia ) fell under Polish and Lithuanian rule . The southern part of Estonia and the northern part of Latvia were ceded to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and formed into the ' ' Ducatus Ultradunensis ' ' ( Prdaugavas hercogiste ) . Gotthard Kettler , the last Master of the Order of Livonia , formed the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia . Though the duchy was a vassal state to Poland , it retained a considerable degree of autonomy and experienced a golden age in the 17th century . Latgalia , the easternmost region of Latvia , became a part of the Polish district of Inflanty . The 17th and early 18th centuries saw a struggle between the the eastern Baltic . After the PolishSwedish War ( 16001611 ) , northern Livonia ( including Vidzeme ) came under Swedish rule . Riga became the capital of Swedish Livonia and the largest city in the entire Swedish Empire . Fighting continued sporadically between Sweden and Poland until the Truce of Altmark in 1629 . In Latvia , the Swedish period is generally remembered as positive ; serfdom was eased , a network of schools was established for the peasantry , and the power of the regional barons was diminished . Several important cultural changes occurred during this time . Under Swedish and largely German rule , western Latvia adopted Lutheranism as its main religion . The ancient tribes of the Couronians , Semigallians , Selonians , Livs and northern Latgallians assimilated to form the Latvian people , speaking one Latvian language . Throughout all the centuries , however , no such thing as a Latvian state existed so the borders and definitions of who exactly fell within that group are largely subjective . Meanwhile , largely isolated from the rest of Latvia , southern Latgallians adopted Catholicism under Polish/Jesuit influence many Polish and Russian loanwords. # Latvia in the Russian Empire ( 17101917 ) # The Capitulation of Estonia and Livonia in 1710 and the Treaty of Nystad , ending the Great Northern War in 1721 , gave Vidzeme to Russia ( it became part of the Governorate of Livonia During the Great Northern War ( 17001721 ) , up to 40 per cent of Latvians died from famine and plague . Half the residents of Riga were killed by plague in 17101711 . The promises Peter the Great made to the Baltic German nobility at the fall of Riga in 1710 , confirmed by the Treaty of Nystad and known as the Capitulations , largely reversed the Swedish reforms . Peter seriously considered moving Russian capital into Riga and visited Riga for several long stays ( he stayed in his own palace offered as a gift by Riga Magistrate together with keys from Riga ; palace purchased by him is still standing ; keys are exhibited in Moscow Kremlin museum ) . Curiously , Peter the Great 's wife Marta ( later Catherine I of Russia ) was the only the serfs took place in Courland in 1817 and in Vidzeme in 1819 . In practice , however , the emancipation was actually advantageous to the landowners and nobility , as it dispossessed peasants of their land without compensation , forcing them to return to work at the estates of their own free will . During the 19th century , the social structure changed dramatically . A class of independent farmers established itself after reforms allowed the peasants to repurchase their land , but many landless peasants remained . There also developed a growing urban proletariat and an increasingly influential Latvian bourgeoisie . The Young Latvian ( ) movement laid the groundwork for nationalism from the middle of the century , many of its leaders looking to the Slavophiles for support against the prevailing German-dominate