Albert of Prussia ( 17 May 1490 20 March 1568 ) was the last Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights , who after converting to Lutheranism , became the first monarch of the Duchy of Prussia , the secularized state that emerged from the former Monastic State of the Teutonic Knights . Albert was the first European ruler to establish Protestantism as the official state religion of his lands . He proved instrumental in the political spread of Protestantism in its early stage , ruling the Prussian lands for nearly six decades ( 15101568 ) . A member of the Brandenburg-Ansbach branch of the House of Hohenzollern , Albert 's election as Grand Master had brought about hopes of a reversal of the declining fortune of the Teutonic Knights . He was a skilled political administrator and leader , and did indeed reverse the decline of the Teutonic Order . However , Albert , who was sympathetic to the demands of Martin Luther , rebelled against the Catholic church , and the Holy Roman Empire by converting the Teutonic state into a Protestant and hereditary realm , the his uncle , the King of Poland . The arrangement was confirmed by the Treaty of Krakw in 1525 . Albert pledged a personal oath to the King and in return was invested with the duchy for himself and his heirs . Albert 's rule in Prussia was fairly prosperous . Although he had some trouble with the peasantry , the confiscation of the lands and treasures of the Catholic church enabled him to propitiate the nobles and provide for the expenses of the newly established Prussian court . He was active in imperial politics , joining the League of Torgau in 1526 , and acted in unison with the Protestants in plotting to overthrow Emperor Charles V after the issue of the Augsburg Interim in May 1548 . Albert established schools in every town and founded Knigsberg University in 1544 . He promoted culture and arts , patronising the works of Erasmus Reinhold and Caspar Hennenberger . Albert 's final years were clouded by peasant resentment of heavy taxes , a step he felt compelled to take due to there no longer being any church land available to confiscate in , and Paul Skali also caused various religious and political disputes . Albert spent his final years virtually deprived of power , and died at Tapiau on 20 March 1568 . His son Albert Frederick succeeded him as Duke of Prussia . Albert 's dissolution of the Teutonic State caused the founding of the Duchy of Prussia , paving the way for the rise of the House of Hohenzollern . He is therefore often seen as the father of the Prussian nation , and even as indirectly responsible for the unification of Germany . # Early life # Albert was born in Ansbach in Franconia as the third son of Frederick I , Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach . His mother was Sophia , daughter of Casimir IV Jagiellon , Grand Duke of Lithuania and King of Poland , and his wife Elisabeth of Austria . He was raised for a career in the Church and spent some time at the court of Hermann IV of Hesse , Elector of Cologne , who appointed him canon of the Cologne Cathedral . Despite being quite religious , he was also interested in mathematics and teachings of the Church in favour of scientific theories . His career was forwarded by the Church however and institutions of the Catholic clerics supported his early advance . Turning to a more active life , Albert accompanied Emperor Maximilian I to Italy in 1508 , and after his return spent some time in the Kingdom of Hungary . # Grand Master # Duke Frederick of Saxony , Grand Master of the Teutonic Order , died in December 1510 . Albert was chosen as his successor early in 1511 in the hope that his relationship to his maternal uncle , Sigismund I the Old , Grand Duke of Lithuania and King of Poland , would facilitate a settlement of the disputes over eastern Prussia , which had been held by the Order under Polish suzerainty since the Second Peace of Thorn ( 1466 ) . The new Grand Master , aware of his duties to the empire and to the papacy , refused to submit to the crown of Poland . As war over the Order 's existence appeared inevitable , Albert made strenuous efforts to secure allies and carried on by the ravages of members of the Order in Poland , culminated in a war which began in December 1519 and devastated Prussia . Albert was granted a four-year truce early in 1521 . The dispute was referred to Emperor Charles V and other princes , but as no settlement was reached Albert continued his efforts to obtain help in view of a renewal of the war . For this purpose he visited the Diet of Nuremberg in 1522 , where he made the acquaintance of the Reformer Andreas Osiander , by whose influence Albert was won over to Protestantism . The Grand Master then journeyed to Wittenberg , where he was advised by Martin Luther to abandon the rules of his Order , to marry , and to convert Prussia into a hereditary duchy for himself . This proposal , which was understandably appealing to Albert , had already been discussed by some of his relatives ; but it was necessary to proceed cautiously , and he assured Pope Adrian VI that he was anxious to reform the Order and punish the knights who had adopted Lutheran doctrines . Luther but in order to facilitate the change made special efforts to spread his teaching among the Prussians , while Albert 's brother , Margrave George of Brandenburg-Ansbach , laid the scheme before their uncle , Sigismund I the Old of Poland . # Duke in Prussia # After some delay Sigismund assented to the offer , with the provision that Prussia should be treated as a Polish fiefdom ; and after this arrangement had been confirmed by a treaty concluded at Krakw , Albert pledged a personal oath to Sigismund I and was invested with the duchy for himself and his heirs on 10 February 1525 . The Estates of the land then met at Knigsberg ( Kaliningrad ) and took the oath of allegiance to the new duke , who used his full powers to promote the doctrines of Luther . This transition did not , however , take place without protest . Summoned before the imperial court of justice , Albert refused to appear and was proscribed , while the Order elected a new Grand Master , Walter von Cronberg , who received Prussia as a fief at the experiencing the tumult of the Reformation , the German Peasants ' War , and the wars against the Ottoman Turks , they did not enforce the ban on the duke , and agitation against him soon died away . In imperial politics Albert was fairly active . Joining the League of Torgau in 1526 , he acted in unison with the Protestants , and was among the princes who banded and plotted together to overthrow Charles V after the issue of the Augsburg Interim in May 1548 . For various reasons , however , poverty and personal inclination among others , he did not take a prominent part in the military operations of this period . The early years of Albert 's rule in Prussia were fairly prosperous . Although he had some trouble with the peasantry , the lands and treasures of the church enabled him to propitiate the nobles and for a time to provide for the expenses of the court . He did something for the furtherance of learning by establishing schools in every town and by freeing serfs who adopted a scholastic life . In 1544 , , where he appointed his friend Andreas Osiander to a professorship in 1549 . Albert also paid for the printing of the Astronomical Prutenic Tables compiled by Erasmus Reinhold and the first maps of Prussia by Caspar Hennenberger . This step was the beginning of the troubles which clouded the closing years of Albert 's reign . Osiander 's divergence from Luther 's doctrine of justification by faith involved him in a violent quarrel with Philip Melanchthon , who had adherents in Knigsberg , and these theological disputes soon created an uproar in the town . The duke strenuously supported Osiander , and the area of the quarrel soon broadened . There were no longer church lands available with which to conciliate the nobles , the burden of taxation was heavy , and Albert 's rule became unpopular . After Osiander 's death in 1552 , Albert favoured a preacher named Johann Funck , who , with an adventurer named Paul Skali , exercised great influence over him and obtained considerable wealth at public expense . The state of turmoil caused by these religious and political disputes was increased by the should that happen , to appoint a regent , as his only son , Albert Frederick was still a mere youth . The duke was forced to consent to a condemnation of the teaching of Osiander , and the climax came in 1566 when the Estates appealed to King Sigismund II Augustus of Poland , Albert 's cousin , who sent a commission to Knigsberg . Skali saved his life by flight , but Funck was executed . The question of the regency was settled , and a form of Lutheranism was adopted and declared binding on all teachers and preachers . Virtually deprived of power , the duke lived for two more years , and died at Tapiau on 20 March 1568 . Cornelis Floris de Vriendt designed his tomb within Knigsberg Cathedral . Albert was a voluminous letter writer , and corresponded with many of the leading personages of the time . # Legacy # Although Albert has received relatively little recognition in German history , his dissolution of the Teutonic State caused the founding of the Duchy of Prussia , which would eventually become arguably the most powerful . Albert is therefore often seen as the father of the Prussian nation , and even as indirectly responsible for the unification of Germany . He was a skilled political administrator and leader , and effectively reversed the decline of the Teutonic Order , until he betrayed it by transforming the order 's lands into his own duchy , secularizing it in the process . Albert was the first German noble to support Luther 's ideas and in 1544 founded the University of Knigsberg , the Albertina , as a rival to the Roman Catholic Cracow Academy . It was the second Lutheran university in the German states , after the University of Marburg . A relief of Albert over the Renaissance-era portal of Knigsberg Castle 's southern wing was created by Andreas Hess in 1551 according to plans by Christoph Rmer . Another relief by an unknown artist was included in the wall of the Albertina 's original campus . This depiction , which showed the duke with his sword over his shoulder , was the popular Albertus , the symbol of the university . The original was moved to while the sculptor Paul Kimritz created a duplicate for the wall . Another version of the Albertus by Lothar Sauer was included at the entrance of the Knigsberg State and Royal Library . In 1880 Friedrich Reusch created a sandstone bust of Albert at the Regierungsgebude , the administrative building for Regierungsbezirk Knigsberg . On 19 May 1891 Reusch premiered a famous statue of Albert at Knigsberg Castle with the inscription : Albert of Brandenburg , Last Grand Master , First Duke in Prussia . Albert Wolff also designed an equestrian statue of Albert located at the new campus of the Albertina . King 's Gate contains a statue of Albert . Albert was oft-honored in the quarter Maraunenhof in northern Knigsberg . Its main street was named Herzog-Albrecht-Allee in 1906 . Its town square , Knig-Ottokar-Platz , was renamed Herzog-Albrecht-Platz in 1934 to match its church , the **31;17536;TOOLONG # Spouse and issue # Albert married first , to Princess Dorothea ( 1 August 1504 11 April 1547 ) , daughter of King Frederick I of Denmark , in 1526 . They had six children ; *Anna Sophia ( 15271591 ( 15291530 ) *Lucia Dorothea ( 15311532 ) *Lucia ( 15371539 ) *Albert ( 15391539 ) He married secondly to Anna Maria ( 153220 March 1568 ) , daughter of Eric I , Duke of Brunswick-Lneburg , in 1550 . The couple had two children ; *Elisabeth ( 15511596 ) *Albert Frederick ( 15531618 ) # Ancestors # <center> ahnentafel-compact5 </center> # Notes #
 subdivisiontype1 = Governorate Aswan ( ; ' ' ' ' ; Ancient Egyptian : ' ' ' ' **28;11287;span ; </span> ' ' ' ' **28;11317;span ; </span> ' ' ' ' **28;11347;span ) </span> , formerly spelled ' ' Assuan ' ' **26;11377;span , </span> is a city in the south of Egypt , the capital of the Aswan Governorate . Aswan is a busy market and tourist centre located just north of the Aswan Dams on the east bank of the Nile at the first cataract . The modern city has expanded and includes the formerly separate community on the island of Elephantine . # History # Aswan is the ancient city of ' ' Swenett ' ' **26;11405;span , </span> which in antiquity was the frontier town of Ancient Egypt facing the south . Swenett is supposed to have derived its name from an Egyptian goddess with the same name . The city is mentioned by numerous ancient writers , including Herodotus , Strabo , Stephanus of Byzantium , Ptolemy , Pliny the Elder , Vitruvius , and it appears on the Antonine Itinerary . the Book of Isaiah . The latitude of the city that would become Aswan located at 24 5 23 was an object of great interest to the ancient geographers . They believed that it was seated immediately under the tropic , and that on the day of the summer solstice , a vertical staff cast no shadow . They noted that the sun 's disc was reflected in a well at noon . This statement is only approximately correct ; at the summer solstice , the shadow was only <sup> 1 </sup> / <sub> 400 </sub> th of the staff , and so could scarcely be discerned , and the northern limb of the Sun 's disc would be nearly vertical . However , Eratosthenes used this information together with measurements of the shadow length on the solstice at Alexandria to perform the first known calculation of the circumference of the Earth . The Nile is nearly 2.7 m wide above Aswan . From this frontier town to the northern extremity of Egypt , the river flows for more than without bar or cataract . The voyage from Aswan to Alexandria # Climate # Aswan has a hot desert climate ( Kppen climate classification BWh ) like the rest of Egypt . Aswan and Luxor have the hottest summer days of any other city in Egypt . Aswan is one of the hottest , sunniest and driest cities in the world . Averages high temperatures are above 40 C ( 104 F ) during summer ( June , July , August ) while averages low temperatures remain above 25 C ( 77 F ) . Summers are long , prolonged and extremely hot . Averages high temperatures remain above 23 C ( 73.4 F ) during the coldest month of the year while averages low temperatures remain above 8 C ( 46.4 F ) . Winters are short , brief and extremely warm . Wintertime is very pleasant and enjoyable while summertime is unbearably hot with blazing sunshine although desert heat is dry . The climate of Aswan is extremely dry year-round , with less than 1 mm of average annual precipitation . The desert city is one of the driest ones in the world , and rainfall does n't occur every there was seven years earlier . Aswan is one of the least humid cities on the planet , with an average relative humidity of only 26% , with a maximum mean of 42% during winter and a minimum mean of 16% during summer . The climate of Aswan is extremely clear , bright and sunny year-round , in all seasons , with a low seasonal variation , with about some 4,000 hours of annual sunshine , very close of the maximum theoretical sunshine duration . Aswan is one of the sunniest places on Earth . The highest record temperature was on May 22 , 1973 and the lowest record temperature was on January 6 , 1989. cite web # Education # In 1999 , South Valley University was inaugurated and it has three branches ; Aswan , Qena and Hurghada . It was the first university in Upper Egypt and it was organized in departmental basis . The university grew steadily and now it is firmly established as a major institution of higher education in Upper Egypt . Aswan branch of Assiut University began in 1973 with the Faculty of Education Aswan branch has five faculties namely ; Science , Education , Engineering , Arts , Social Works and Institute of Energy . The Faculty of Science in Aswan has six departments . Each department has one educational programme : Chemistry , Geology , Physics and Zoology . Except Botany Department , which has three educational programmes : Botany , Environmental Sciences and Microbiology ; and Mathematics Department , which has two educational programmes : Mathematics and Computer Science . The Faculty of Science awards the following degrees : Bachelor of Science in nine educational programmes , Higher Diploma , Master of Science and Philosophy Doctor of Science . Over 100 academic staff members are employed in. # Transport # Aswan is served by the Aswan International Airport . Train and bus service is also available . Taxi and rickshaw are used for transport here . <center> <gallery> File:S F-E-CAMERON **37;11433;TOOLONG Michael 's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral , built in the Coptic style File:AswanIMG0764.jpgThe El-Tabia Mosque in Aswan File:Railway Station Street , Aswan , Egypt , Oct 2004 A.jpgA view along the street connecting railway station and Nile File:Aswan Street , Egypt , Lotus-Tower near Aswan File : Assuan.jpgAswan File:Aswan , NE.jpgThe northeast neighbourhood File:Nile N517266177 30554 627. jpgThe Nile near Aswan **34;11472;TOOLONG Museum : entrance </gallery> </center> # See also # * Wadi Allaqi national park * Abu Simbel * Aswan Dam * Elephantine * Philae * Luxor * Kitchener 's Island * Temple of Kalabsha * Nubia * Banu Kanz * Coptic Diocese of Syene # References # * 
 The Government of Barbados ( GoB ) , is made up structurally of The Monarch , Queen Elizabeth II as Head of State . She is represented by her representative the Governor-General , Sir Elliott Belgrave , G.C.M.G. , K.A. , The country has a bicameral legislature and a mature social democratic party system , based on universal adult suffrage and total purity in elections . The Senate has 21 members , all appointed by the Governor-General on behalf of the Monarch , 12 on the advice of the Prime Minister , two on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition , and seven in the Governor-Generals sole discretion . The House of Assembly has 30 members , all elected . Both Houses debate all legislation . However , the House of Assembly may ultimately override Senate 's rejection of money Bills and other Bills except Bills amending the Constitution . Officers of each House ( President and Deputy President of the Senate and Speaker , Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees of the Assembly ) are elected from the Members of the respective Houses . In , Barbados has evolved into a leading independent Parliamentary democracy and Constitutional monarchy , meaning that all real power rests with the Parliament , but the country maintains aspects of a historic Monarchy/Kingdom government also , which allows stability . Executive authority is vested in the Monarch who grants all functioning of the government to both the Prime Minister and Cabinet who are collectively responsible to Parliament . Barbadian law is rooted historically on English common law , and the Constitution of Barbados implemented in 1966 , is supreme law of the land . Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the individual are set out in the Constitution and are protected by a strict legal code . The Cabinet is headed by the Prime Minister who must be an elected MP and other Ministers are appointed from either chamber by the Governor-General as advised by the Prime Minister . The Governor-General appoints as Leader of the Opposition the Member of House of Assembly who commands the support of the largest number of Members of that House in opposition to the ruling party 's government . The maximum duration of a Parliament is simultaneous dissolution of both Houses of Parliament by the Governor-General acting on the advice of the Prime Minister . There is an established non-political public service . Also , there are separate constitutional commissions for : the Judicial and Legal Service , the Public Service , and the Police Service . # History # The government has been chosen by elections since 1961 elections , when Barbados achieved full self-governance . Before then , the government was a Crown colony consisting of either colonial administration solely ( such as the Executive Council ) , or a mixture of colonial rule and a partially elected assembly , such as the Legislative Council . Since Independence , the Barbados Labour Party ( BLP ) governed from 1976 to 1986 , and from September 1994 2008 . The Democratic Labour Party ( DLP ) held office 1966 to 1976 , from 1986 to 1994 , and has formed the Government January 2008 to present . # Executive branch # The Prime Minister and Cabinet is formed by the political party which gains a simple majority in the general elections held in Barbados . These years apart , however elections can be called whenever the Government so chooses to seek a new mandate or loses a vote of no confidence in Parliament . It is part of Barbados ' political system and supported by the Public service . # Ministries # **64;184456;span &amp;#x5b ; edit table&amp;#x5d ; </span> # Judicial Branch # Barbados ' Courts include the Magistrates ' Court , High Court , and Court of Appeal . It is also a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice , and allows some appeals to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights . # Perception # Transparency International ranked Barbados as 17th place ( of 179 ) in the world on its corruption perceptions index in 2010 , with only 1 nation scoring better in the Americas . ( ) # See also # *Politics of Barbados *Monarchy of Barbados *Parliament of Barbados *Prime Minister of Barbados *Cabinet of Barbados 
 Genetically modified maize ( corn ) is a genetically modified crop . Specific maize strains have been genetically engineered to express agriculturally-desirable traits , including resistance to pests and to herbicides . Maize strains with both traits are now in use in multiple countries . GM maize has also caused controversy with respect to possible health effects , impact on other insects and impact on other plants via gene flow . One strain , called Starlink , was approved only for animal feed in the US , but was found in food , leading to a series of recalls starting in 2000. # Marketed Products # # Herbicide resistant maize # Corn varieties resistant to glyphosate herbicides were first commercialized in 1996 by Monsanto , and are known as Roundup Ready Corn . They tolerate the use of Roundup . Bayer CropScience developed Liberty Link Corn that is resistant to glufosinate . Pioneer Hi-Bred has developed and markets corn hybrids with tolerance to imidazoline herbicides under the trademark Clearfield - though in these hybrids , the herbicide-tolerance trait was bred using tissue culture selection and the chemical mutagen framework governing the approval of transgenic crops does not apply for Clearfield . As of 2011 , herbicide-resistant GM corn was grown in 14 countries . By 2012 , 26 varieties herbicide-resistant GM maize were authorised for import into the European Union . In 2012 the EU was reported to import 30 million tons a year of GM crops , but such imports remain controversial . Cultivation of herbicide-resistant corn in the EU provides substantial farm-level benefits . # Insecticide-producing corn # Bt corn is a variant of maize that has been genetically altered to express one or more proteins from the Bacillus thuringiensis bacteria . The protein is poisonous to certain insect pests and is widely used in organic gardening . The European corn borer causes about a billion dollars in damage to corn crops each year . In recent years , traits have been added to ward off Corn ear worms and root worms , the latter of which annually causes about a billion dollars in damages . The Bt protein is expressed throughout the plant . When a vulnerable insect eats the Bt-containing plant , the protein is human gut is acidic ) . In the alkaline environment the protein partially unfolds and is cut by other proteins , forming a toxin that paralyzes the insect 's digestive system and forms holes in the gut wall . The insect stops eating within a few hours and eventually starves . In 1996 , the first GM maize producing a Bt Cry protein was approved , which killed the European corn borer and related species ; subsequent Bt genes were introduced that killed corn rootworm larvae . Bt genes that are approved include the following , singly and stacked ( event name between brackets ) : Cry1A.105 ( MON89034 ) , CryIAb ( MON810 ) , CryIF ( 1507 ) , Cry2Ab ( MON89034 ) , Cry3Bb1 ( MON863 and MON88017 ) , Cry34Ab1 ( 59122 ) , Cry35Ab1 ( 59122 ) , mCry3A ( MIR604 ) , and Vip3A ( MIR162 ) , in both corn and cotton . Corn genetically modified to produce VIP was first approved in the US in 2010. # Drought resistance # In 2013 Monsanto launched the first transgenic drought tolerance trait in a line is provided by the insertion of the cspB gene from the soil microbe ' ' Bacillus subtilis ' ' ; it was approved by the USDA in 2011 and by China in 2013. # # Sweet corn # # GM sweet corn varieties include Attribute , the brand name for insect-resistant sweet corn developed by Syngenta. # Products in development # In 2007 , South African researchers announced the production of transgenic maize resistant to maize streak virus ( MSV ) , although it has not been released as a product . # Refuges # US Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) regulations require farmers who plant Bt corn to plant non-Bt corn nearby ( called a refuge ) to provide a location to harbor vulnerable pests . The theory behind these refuges is to slow the evolution of resistance to the pesticide . EPA regulations also require seed companies to train farmers how to maintain refuges , to collect data on the refuges and to report that data to the EPA . A study of these reports found that from 2003 to 2005 farmer compliance with keeping refuges was above corn farmers did not keep refuges properly , raising concerns that resistance would develop . Unmodified crops received most of the economic benefits of Bt corn in the US in 1996-2007 , because of the overall reduction of pest populations . This reduction came because females laid eggs on modified and unmodified strains alike . # Resistance # Resistant strains of the European corn borer have developed in areas with defective or absent refuge management . In November 2009 , Monsanto scientists found the pink bollworm had become resistant to first-generation Bt cotton in parts of Gujarat , India - that generation expresses one Bt gene , ' ' Cry1Ac ' ' . This was the first instance of Bt resistance confirmed by Monsanto anywhere in the world . Bollworm resistance to first generation Bt cotton has been identified in the Australia , China , Spain and the United States . In 2012 , a Florida field trial demonstrated that army worms were resistant to pesticide-containing GM corn produced by Dupont-Dow ; armyworm resistance was first discovered in Puerto Rico in 2006 , prompting Dow and DuPont to voluntarily stop selling of GM crops varies between countries , with some of the most-marked differences occurring between the USA and Europe . Regulation varies in a given country depending on intended uses . # Controversy # Broad scientific consensus holds that food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food . The scientific rigor of the studies regarding human health has been disputed due to alleged lack of independence and due to conflicts of interest involving governing bodies and some of those who perform and evaluate the studies . GM crops provide a number of ecological benefits , but there are also concerns for their overuse , stalled research outside of the Bt seed industry , proper management and issues with Bt resistance arising from their misuse . Critics have objected to GM crops on ecological , economic and health grounds . The economic issues derive from those organisms that are subject to intellectual property law , mostly patents . The first generation of GM crops lose patent protection beginning in 2015 . Monsanto has claimed it will not to pursue farmers who retain seeds of off-patent plant to impact nontarget organisms before approving commercial release . A 1999 study found that in a lab environment , pollen from Bt maize dusted onto milkweed could harm the monarch butterfly . Several groups later studied the phenomenon in both the field and the laboratory , resulting in a risk assessment that concluded that any risk posed by the corn to butterfly populations under real-world conditions was negligible . A 2002 review of the scientific literature concluded that the commercial large-scale cultivation of current Btmaize hybrids did not pose a significant risk to the monarch population . A 2007 review found that nontarget invertebrates are generally more abundant in Bt cotton and Bt maize fields than in nontransgenic fields managed with insecticides . However , in comparison with insecticide-free control fields , certain nontarget taxa are less abundant in Bt fields . # Gene flow # Gene flow is the transfer of genes and/or alleles from one species to another . Concerns focus on the interaction between GM and other maize varieties in Mexico , and of gene flow into refuges . In 2009 the government of Mexico created a is the center of diversity for maize , gene flow could affect a large fraction of the world 's maize strains . A 2001 report in ' ' Nature ' ' presented evidence that Bt maize was cross-breeding with unmodified maize in Mexico . The data in this paper was later described as originating from an artifact . ' ' Nature ' ' later stated , the evidence available is not sufficient to justify the publication of the original paper . A 2005 large-scale study failed to find any evidence of contamination in Oaxaca . However , other authors also found evidence of cross-breeding between natural maize and transgenic maize . A 2004 study found Bt protein in kernels of refuge corn . # Food # The French High Council of Biotechnologies Scientific Committee reviewed the 2009 Vendmois ' ' et al . ' ' study and concluded that it .. presents no admissible scientific element likely to ascribe any haematological , hepatic or renal toxicity to the three re-analysed GMOs . A 2011 Canadian study looked at the presence of CryAb1 protein ( BT toxin ) in non-pregnant women , levels of the protein , including 93% of pregnant women and 80% of fetuses at concentrations of 0.19 0.30 and 0.04 0.04 mean SD ng/ml , respectively . The paper did not discuss safety implications or find any health problems . The paper was found to be unconvincing by multiple authors and organizations . In a swine model , Cry1Ab-specific antibodies were not detected in pregnant sows or their offspring and no negative effects from feeding Bt maize to pregnant sows were observed . In January 2013 , the European Food Safety Authority released all data submitted by Monsanto in relation to the 2003 authorisation of maize genetically modified for glyphosate tolerance . # Starlink corn recalls # StarLink contains Cry9C , which had not previously been used in a GM crop . Starlink 's creator , Plant Genetic Systems had applied to the US Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) to market Starlink for use in animal feed and in human food . StarLink corn was subsequently found in food destined for consumption by humans in the US , Japan , and South Korea . This corn became the subject when Taco Bell-branded taco shells sold in supermarkets were found to contain the corn . Sales of StarLink seed were discontinued . The registration for Starlink varieties was voluntarily withdrawn by Aventis in October 2000 . ( Pioneer had been bought by AgrEvo which then became Aventis CropScience at the time of the incident , which was later bought by Bayer Fifty-one people reported adverse effects to the FDA ; US Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) , which determined that 28 of them were possibly related to Starlink . However , the CDC studied the blood of these 28 individuals and concluded there was no evidence of hypersensitivity to the Starlink Bt protein . A subsequent review of these tests by the Federal Insecticide , Fungicide , and Rodenticide Act Scientific Advisory Panel points out that while the negative results decrease the probability that the Cry9C protein is the cause of allergic symptoms in the individuals examined .. in the absence of a positive control and questions regarding the sensitivity and specificity of the assay , it is not possible to assign a negative predictive value to this . of the Starlink Bt proteins since 2001 . In 2005 , aid sent by the UN and the US to Central American nations also contained some StarLink corn . The nations involved , Nicaragua , Honduras , El Salvador and Guatemala refused to accept the aid . In August 2013 , StarLink corn was reported to be found in some foods in Saudi Arabia . # Corporate Espionage # On December 19 , 2013 six Chinese citizens were indicted in Iowa on charges of plotting to steal genetically modified seeds worth tens of millions of dollars to Monsanto and DuPont Mo Hailong , director of international business at the Beijing Dabeinong Technology Group Co. , part of the Beijing-based DBN Group , was accused of stealing trade secrets after he was found digging in an Iowa cornfield . # See also # * Genetically modified food * Genetically modified crops * Genetically modified food controversies # References # 
 imageshield = Dublin crest.svg County Dublin ( or ' ' Contae tha Cliath ' ' ) is a county in Ireland . It is sometimes officially referred to as the Dublin Region and is in the province of Leinster . It is named after the city of Dublin , which is the regional capital and the capital city of Ireland . County Dublin was one of the first parts of Ireland to be shired by King John of England following the Norman invasion of Ireland . Prior to 1994 County Dublin was an administrative county run by a county council with functional area covering the whole county excluding the functional area of Dublin City Council . In 1994 Dublin County Council was abolished and replaced with three separate administrative county councils : Dn LaoghaireRathdown , Fingal and South Dublin . The population of the county was 1,270,603 according to the census of 2011. # Local government and politics # There are four local authorities whose remit collectively encompasses the geographic area of the county and city of Dublin . These are Dublin City Council , South Dublin County . There is also Dublin Regional Authority which has authority over the while county but this body has few powers . It consists of 30 representatives who meet once per month . These representatives are nominated from the four administrative councils of the region . Like each Regional Authority , it is assisted in its duties by an Operational Committee and EU Operational Committee . Prior to the enactment of the Local Government ( Dublin ) Act 1993 , the county was a unified whole even though it was administered by two local authorities - Dublin County Council and Dublin Corporation . Since the enactment of the Local Government Act 2001 in particular , the geographic area of the county has been divided between three entities at the level of county and a further entity at the level of city . They rank equally as first level local administrative units of the NUTS 3 Dublin Region for Eurostat purposes . There are 34 LAU 1 entities in the Republic of Ireland . Each local authority is responsible for certain local services such as sanitation , planning and development , libraries , housing . The county is part of the Dublin constituency for the purposes of European elections . For elections to Dil ireann , the area of the county is today divided into twelve constituencies : Dublin Central , Dublin MidWest , Dublin North , Dublin NorthCentral , Dublin NorthEast , Dublin NorthWest , Dublin South , Dublin SouthCentral , Dublin SouthEast , Dublin SouthWest , Dublin West and Dn Laoghaire . Together they return 47 deputies ( TDs ) to the Dil. # Dublin Region # The Dublin Region is a NUTS Level III region of Ireland . The region is one of eight regions of the Republic of Ireland for the purposes of Eurostat statistics . Its NUTS code is IE021 . It is co-extensive with the old county . The regional capital is Dublin City which is also the national capital . It is governed by the Dublin Regional Authority which consists of 30 representatives who meet once per month . These representatives are nominated from the four administrative councils of the region : *Dublin City Council ( 14 ) *South Dublin County Council , ( 6 ) including Regions *Dn Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council ( 5 ) *Fingal County Council ( 5 ) Like each Regional Authority , the DRA is assisted in its duties by an Operational Committee and EU Operational Committee . # Dissolution of Dublin County Council # Dublin County Council ( which did not include the county borough of Dublin ) was abolished in 1994 and the area divided among the administrative counties of Dn LaoghaireRathdown , Fingal and South Dublin each with its county seat . To these areas may be added the area of Dublin city which collectively comprise the Dublin Region ( ' ' ' ' ) and come under the remit of the Dublin Regional Authority . The area lost its administrative county status in 1994 , with Section 9 Part 1(a) of the ' ' Local Government ( Dublin ) Act , 1993 ' ' stating that the county shall cease to exist . At that time , and in response to a European Council report highlighting Ireland as the most centralised country in the European Union , it was decided that a single County Dublin was unmanageable and undemocratic from dissolve Dublin County Council , Avril Doyle TD said , The Bill before us today effectively abolishes County Dublin , and as one born and bred in these parts of Ireland I find it rather strange that we in this House are abolishing County Dublin . I am not sure whether Dubliners realise that that is what we are about today , but in effect that is the case . Despite the legal status of the Dublin Region , the term County Dublin is still in common usage . Many organisations and sporting teams continue to organise on a County Dublin or Dublin Region basis . The area formerly known as County Dublin is now defined in legislation solely as the Dublin Region under the ' ' Local Government Act , 1991 ( Regional Authorities ) ( Establishment ) Order , 1993 ' ' , and this is the terminology officially used by the four Dublin administrative councils in press releases concerning the former county area . The term ' ' Greater Dublin Area ' ' , which might consist of some or all of the Dublin Region along with counties standing . The latest Ordnance Survey Ireland Discovery Series ( Third Edition 2005 ) 1:50,000 map of the Dublin Region , Sheet 50 , shows the boundaries of the city and three surrounding counties of the region . Extremities of the Dublin Region , in the north and south of the region , appear in other sheets of the series , 43 and 56 respectively . # Media # * The local radio stations include 98FM , FM104 , 103.2 Dublin City FM , Dublin 's Q102 , Spin 1038 , Dublin 's Country Mix 106.8 , Phantom 105.2 and Radio Nova . * The local newspapers include ' ' Dublin Penny Journal ' ' , ' ' The Echo ' ' , ' ' The Northside People ' ' , ' ' The Southside People ' ' , ' ' Liffey Champion ' ' and ' ' The Metro Herald ' ' . Most of the area can receive the five main UK television channels on analogue television as well as the main Irish channels , along with Sky TV and UPC cable television . # Transport # * Road N4 and N7 national primary roads , and the M1 , M11 and M50 motorways . * Heavy rail : The InterCity and Commuter rail services ( Iarnrd ireann ) . * Light rail : The Luas tram system serving Dublin City and its southern and western suburbs . * Rapid transit : The DART and the proposed Dublin Metro line . * Port : Dublin Port and Dn Laoghaire Harbour . * Air : Dublin International Airport . # Economy # The economy of County Dublin was identified as being the powerhouse behind the Celtic Tiger , a period of strong economic growth of the state . This resulted in the economy of the county expanding by almost 100% between the early 1990s and 2007 . This growth resulted from incoming high-value industries , such as financial services and software manufacturing , as well as low-skilled retail and domestic services , which caused a shift away from older manufacturing-industry . This change saw high unemployment in the 1980s and early 1990s which resulted in damage to the capitals social structure . County Dublin 's GDP in 2002 was 42.505bn , , and 171% of the European Union average . The workforce of the county in 2003 was 555,306 which equated to a 95.9% employment rate with services ( 80.0% ) , industrial employment ( 12.0% ) , and construction ( 8.0% ) forming the key industries . # Transport # County Dublin is the main transport node of Ireland , and contains one international airport , Dublin Airport . It is also served by two main seaports , Dn Laoghaire port and Dublin Port , which is just located outside of the city center . The two main train stations are Dublin Heuston and Dublin Connolly , both of which serve intercity trains . # Demographics # According to the 2006 census , County Dublin had a population of 1,187,176 , which constitutes 30% of the national population . This was an increase of 9.5% on 2002 figures . Its population density was 1,218/km . The population of Dublin City , was 506,211 . The median age of the population of the county in the 2006 census was 35.6 years , with 62% of people aged between 2064 years old . 48,000 , with a natural increase of 33,000 people . There are 10,469 Irish speakers in County Dublin attending the 31 Gaelscoils ( Irish language primary schools ) and eight Gaelcholiste ( Irish language secondary schools ) . There may be up to another 10,000 Irish speakers from the Gaeltacht living and working in Dublin also . # Urban areas # A list of the largest urban areas ( those with over 1,000 inhabitants ) in County Dublin . Administrative county seats are shown in bold . class= wikitable ! Rank ! Urban area ! County ! Population <small> ( 2006 census ) # Towns and suburbs # * Adamstown * Artane * Ashtown * Balbriggan * Baldoyle * Balgriffin * Ballinteer * Ballsbridge * Ballyboden * Ballybrack * Ballybough * Ballyfermot * Ballygall * Ballymount * Ballymun * Ballyroan * Balrothery * Bayside * Beaumont * Belfield * Blackrock * Blanchardstown * Bluebell * Booterstown * Brittas * Broadstone * Ballyboughal * Cabinteely * Cabra * Carrickmines * Castleknock * Chapelizod * Cherrywood * Churchtown * Clondalkin * Clonsilla * Clonskeagh * Clontarf * Coolmine * Coolock * Corduff * Deansgrange * Dollymount * Dolphin 's Barn * Donabate * Donaghmede * Donnybrook * Donnycarney * Drimnagh * Drumcondra * Dn Laoghaire * Dundrum * East Wall * Edmondstown * Fairview * Finglas * Firhouse * Foxrock * Garristown * Glasnevin * Glasthule * Glencullen * Glenageary * Goatstown * Grangegorman * Harold 's Cross * Howth * Inchicore * Irishtown * Islandbridge * Jobstown * Kill O ' The Grange * Kilbarrack * Killester * Killiney * Kilmacud * Kilmainham * Kilnamanagh * Kilternan * Kimmage * Kinsealy * Knocklyon * Leopardstown * Loughlinstown * Lucan * Lusk * Malahide * Marino * Milltown * Monkstown * Mount Merrion * Mulhuddart * Newcastle * Naul * Oldbawn * Ongar * Palmerstown * Phibsborough * Portmarnock * Portobello * Raheny * Ranelagh * Rathcoole * Rathfarnham * Rathgar * Rathmichael * Rathmines * Rialto * Ringsend * Rush * Saggart * Sallynoggin * Sandycove * Sandyford * Sandymount * Santry * Shankill * Skerries * Smithfield * Stepaside * Stillorgan * Stoneybatter * Sutton * Swords * Tallaght * Templeogue * Terenure * The Coombe * Tyrrelstown * Walkinstown * Whitechurch 
 birthplace = notableinstruments = Christine Lavin ( born January 2 , 1952 ) is a New York City-based singer-songwriter and promoter of contemporary folk music . She has recorded numerous solo albums , and has also recorded with other female folk artists under the name Four Bitchin ' Babes . She has also put together several compilation albums of contemporary folk artists , including her latest ' ' Just One Angel ' ' , 22 singer/songwriters singing **30;600955;TOOLONG Year 's songs including actor Jeff Daniels , Grammy-winners Janis Ian and Julie Gold , and the Guitar Man Of Central Park David Ippolito . She is known for her sense of humor , which is expressed in both her music and her onstage performances . Many of her songs alternate between emotional reflections on romance and outright comedy . Two of her more famous songs are Sensitive New Age Guys and Bald Headed Men . One of Lavin 's songs , Regretting What I Said to You When You Called Me 11:00 On a Friday Morning to Tell Me that at 1:00 Friday Afternoon You 're Gon na Leave Go Out to the Airport to Catch a Plane to Go Skiing in the Alps for Two Weeks , Not that I Wanted to Go With You , I Was n't Able to Leave Town , I 'm Not a Very Good Skier , I Could n't Expect You to Pay My Way , But After Going Out With You for Three Years I DO N'T Like Surprises ! ! Subtitled : A Musical Apology is notable for having the longest known song title . It is the eighth song on her 1984 album ' ' Future Fossils ' ' , and is 3:04 ( 3 minutes and 4 seconds ) long . In her youth , Lavin was a cheerleader in Peekskill , New York , and she still has impressive baton-twirling skills ; she often ends a concert by twirling a glow-in-the-dark baton with the house lights turned off as she leaves the stage . Lavin worked at Caffe Lena in Saratoga , New York , until Dave Van Ronk convinced her to move to New York City and make a career as a singer-songwriter . She followed his has lived in the City ever since . Lavin was the original host of ' ' Sunday Breakfast ' ' on WFUV in New York City . Lavin was a founding member of the Four Bitchin ' Babes when they were formed in 1990 . In recent years Lavin has been known to host knitting circles before her shows , inviting any knitters , hookers ( people who crochet ) , or other crafters to join her . # Awards # * The ASCAP 43rd Annual Deems Taylor Award for her book ' ' Cold Pizza For Breakfast : A Mem-Wha ? ? ' ' , 2011 * The ASCAP Foundation Jamie deRoy and Friends Award , 2010 * Top 100 of the Most Influential Artists in the Last 15 Years , ' ' Singer Songwriter Magazine ' ' * Top 30 iPod Singer/Songwriters of Choice , WUMB , Boston 2006 * ASCAP Composer Award 1992 , 1993 , 1996 , 1998 , 1999 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 * Singer/Songwriter of the Year , ' ' Back Stage Magazine ' ' , NYC 2001 * Honorable Mention , NAIRD ' ' Please Do nt Make Me Too Happy ' ' * New York Music Award Folk Artist of the Year 1990 , 1992 * World Folk Music Association Kate Wolf Memorial Award 1990 * NAIRD Folk Album of the Year , 1988 : ' ' Good Thing He Cant Read My Mind ' ' # Discography # * ' ' Absolutely Live ' ' ( 1981 ; re-issued by Winthrop , 2000 ) * ' ' Future Fossils ' ' ( Philo , 1984 ) * ' ' Beau Woes and Other Problems of Modern Life ' ' ( Philo , 1986 ) * ' ' Another Woman 's Man ' ' ( Philo , 1987 ) * ' ' Good Thing He Ca n't Read My Mind ' ' ( Philo , 1988 ) * ' ' Attainable Love ' ' ( Philo , 1990 ) * ' ' Compass ' ' ( Philo , 1991 ) * ' ' Live at the Cactus Cafe : What Was I Thinking ? ' ' ( Philo , 1993 ) * ' ' Please Do n't Make Me Too Happy ' My Flashlight on the Moon ' ' ( Shanachie , 1997 ) * ' ' One Wild Night in Concert ' ' ( 1998 ) * ' ' Getting in Touch With My Inner Bitch ' ' ( Christine Lavin , 1999 ) * ' ' The Bellevue Years ' ' ( Philo , 2000 ) * ' ' The Subway Series ' ' ( Christine Lavin , 2001 ) * ' ' Final Exam ' ' ( 2001 ) * ' ' I Was in Love With a Difficult Man ' ' ( Redwing , 2002 ) * ' ' The Runaway Christmas Tree ' ' ( 2003 ) * ' ' Sometimes Mother Really Does Know Best Live ' ' ( Appleseed , 2004 ) * ' ' Folkzinger ' ' ( Appleseed , 2005 ) * ' ' Happydance of the Xenophobe ' ' ( 2007 ) * ' ' I Do n't Make This Stuff Up , I Just Make It Rhyme ' ' ( 2008 ) * ' ' Cold Pizza for Breakfast ' ' ( Yellow Tail Records , 2009 ) 
 Edvard Hagerup Grieg ( ; 15 June 1843 4 September 1907 ) was a Norwegian composer and pianist . He is widely considered one of the leading Romantic era composers , and his music is part of the standard classical repertoire worldwide . His use and development of Norwegian folk music in his own compositions put the music of Norway in the international spectrum , as well as helping develop a national identity , much as Jean Sibelius and Antonn Dvok did in Finland and Bohemia respectively . # Biography # Edvard Hagerup Grieg was born in Bergen , Norway , on 15 June 1843 . His parents were Alexander Grieg ( 18061875 ) , a merchant and vice-consul in Bergen ; and Gesine Judithe Hagerup ( 18141875 ) , a music teacher and daughter of Edvard Hagerup . The family name , originally spelled Greig , has Scottish origins . After the Battle of Culloden in 1746 , Grieg 's great-grandfather , Alexander Greig , traveled widely , settling in Norway about 1770 , and establishing business interests in Bergen . Edvard Grieg was raised in a and taught him to play at the age of six . Grieg studied in several schools , including Tanks Upper School , Tanks School and the N.P.S , Norwegian Private School . In the summer of 1858 , Grieg met the eminent Norwegian violinist Ole Bull , who was a family friend ; Bull 's brother was married to Grieg 's aunt . Bull recognized the 15-year-old boy 's talent and persuaded his parents to send him to the Leipzig Conservatory , the piano department of which was directed by Ignaz Moscheles . Grieg enrolled in the conservatory , concentrating on the piano , and enjoyed the many concerts and recitals given in Leipzig . He disliked the discipline of the conservatory course of study . An exception was the organ , which was mandatory for piano students . In the spring of 1860 , he survived a life-threatening lung disease , pleurisy and tuberculosis . Throughout his life , Grieg 's health was impaired by a destroyed left lung and considerable deformity of his thoracic spine . He suffered from numerous respiratory infections , and ultimately developed combined lung and and sanatoria both in Norway and abroad . Several of his doctors became his personal friends . In 1861 , Grieg made his debut as a concert pianist in Karlshamn , Sweden . In 1862 , he finished his studies in Leipzig and held his first concert in his home town , where his programme included Beethoven 's ' ' Pathtique ' ' sonata . In 1863 , Grieg went to Copenhagen , Denmark , and stayed there for three years . He met the Danish composers J. P. E. Hartmann and Niels Gade . He also met his fellow Norwegian composer Rikard Nordraak ( composer of the Norwegian national anthem ) , who became a good friend and source of inspiration . Nordraak died in 1866 , and Grieg composed a funeral march in his honor . On 11 June 1867 , Grieg married his first cousin , Nina Hagerup . The next year , their only child , Alexandra , was born . Alexandra died in 1869 from meningitis . In the summer of 1868 , Grieg wrote his Piano Concerto in A minor while on holiday in Denmark 3 April 1869 in the Casino Theater in Copenhagen . Grieg himself was unable to be there due to conducting commitments in Christiania ( as Oslo was then named ) . In 1868 , Franz Liszt , who had not yet met Grieg , wrote a testimonial for him to the Norwegian Ministry of Education , which led to Grieg 's obtaining a travel grant . The two men met in Rome in 1870 . On Grieg 's first visit , they went over Grieg 's Violin Sonata No. 1 , which pleased Liszt greatly . On his second visit , in April , Grieg brought with him the manuscript of his Piano Concerto , which Liszt proceeded to sightread ( including the orchestral arrangement ) . Liszt 's rendition greatly impressed his audience , although Grieg gently pointed out to him that he played the first movement too quickly . Liszt also gave Grieg some advice on orchestration , ( for example , to give the melody of the second theme in the first movement to a solo trumpet ) . In 187476 , Grieg composed incidental music for the ' ' , at the request of the author . Grieg had close ties with the Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra ( Harmonien ) , and later became Music Director of the orchestra from 1880 to 1882 . In 1888 , Grieg met Tchaikovsky in Leipzig . Grieg was struck by the sadness in Tchaikovsky. cite web Grieg was awarded two honorary doctorates , first by Cambridge University in 1894 and the next from Oxford University in 1906. # Later years # The Norwegian government provided him with a pension . In the spring 1903 , Grieg made nine 78-rpm gramophone recordings of his piano music in Paris ; all of these historic discs have been reissued on both LPs and CDs , despite limited fidelity . Grieg also made live-recording player piano music rolls for the Hupfeld Phonola piano-player system and Welte-Mignon reproducing system , all of which survive today and can be heard . He also worked with the Aeolian Company for its ' Autograph Metrostyle ' piano roll series wherein he indicated the tempo mapping for many of his pieces . In 1906 , he met the composer and pianist of Grieg 's music and a strong empathy was quickly established . In a 1907 interview , Grieg stated : I have written Norwegian Peasant Dances that no one in my country can play , and here comes this Australian who plays them as they ought to be played ! He is a genius that we Scandinavians can not do other than love . Edvard Grieg died in the late summer of 1907 , aged 64 , after a long period of illness . His final words were Well , if it must be so . The funeral drew between 30,000 and 40,000 people out on the streets of his home town to honor him . Following his wish , his own ' ' Funeral March in Memory of Rikard Nordraak ' ' was played in an orchestration by his friend Johan Halvorsen , who had married Grieg 's niece . In addition , the ' ' Funeral March ' ' movement from Chopin 's Piano Sonata No. 2 was played . Grieg was cremated , and his ashes were entombed in a mountain crypt near his house , Troldhaugen . . Edvard Grieg and his wife considered themselves Unitarians and Nina went to the Unitarian church in Copenhagen after his death . # Music # Some of Grieg 's early works include a symphony ( which he later suppressed ) and a piano sonata . He also wrote three violin sonatas and a cello sonata . Grieg also composed the incidental music for Henrik Ibsen 's play , Peer Gynt - which includes the famous excerpt entitled , In the Hall of the Mountain King . In this piece of music , the adventures of the anti-hero , Peer Gynt , are related , including the episode in which he steals a bride at her wedding . The angry guests chase him , and Peer falls , hitting his head on a rock . He wakes up in a mountain surrounded by trolls . The music of In the Hall of the Mountain King represents the angry trolls taunting Peer and gets louder each time the theme repeats . The music ends with Peer escaping from the mountain . In an 1874 letter to his friend Frants Beyer , Grieg expressed , one of the movement he composed for Peer Gynt , writing I have also written something for the scene in the hall of the mountain King something that I literally ca n't bear listening to because it absolutely reeks of cow-pies , exaggerated Norwegian nationalism , and trollish self-satisfaction ! But I have a hunch that the irony will be discernible . Grieg 's ' ' Holberg Suite ' ' was originally written for the piano , and later arranged by the composer for string orchestra . Grieg wrote songs in which he set lyrics by poets Heinrich Heine , Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , Henrik Ibsen , Hans Christian Andersen , Rudyard Kipling and others . Russian composer Nikolai Myaskovsky used a theme by Grieg for the variations with which he closed his Third String Quartet . Norwegian pianist Eva Knardahl recorded the composer 's complete piano music during 1978 and 1980 . The recordings were reissued in 2006 on 12 compact discs by BIS Records . Grieg himself recorded many of these piano works before his death in 1907. # List of selected works # *Piano Sonata in F major , Op. 8 *Concert Overture ' ' In Autumn ' ' , Op. 11 *Violin Sonata No. 2 in G major , Op. 13 *Piano Concerto in A minor , Op. 16 *Incidental music to Bjrnstjerne Bjrnson 's play ' ' Sigurd Jorsalfar ' ' , Op. 22 *Incidental music to Henrik Ibsen 's play ' ' Peer Gynt ' ' , Op. 23 * ' ' Ballade in the Form of Variations on a Norwegian Folk Song ' ' in g minor , Op. 24 *String Quartet in G minor , Op. 27 * ' ' Album for Male Chorus ' ' , Op. 30 * ' ' Two Elegiac Melodies for Strings ' ' , Op. 34 *Four ' ' Norwegian Dances ' ' for piano four hands , Op. 35 ( later orchestrated ) *Cello Sonata in A minor , Op. 36 * ' ' Holberg Suite ' ' for piano , later arr. for string orchestra , Op. 40 *Violin Sonata No. 3 in C minor , Op. 45 * ' ' Peer Gynt ' ' Suite No. 1 , Op. 46 * ' ' orchestration of four ' ' Lyric Pieces ' ' ) * ' ' Peer Gynt ' ' Suite No. 2 , Op. 55 *Suite from ' ' Sigurd Jorsalfar ' ' , Op. 56 *Four ' ' Symphonic Dances ' ' for piano , later arr. for orchestra , Op. 64 * ' ' Haugtussa ' ' Song Cycle after Arne Garborg , Op. 67 * ' ' Sltter ' ' ( Peasant Dances ) for piano , Op. 72 *Sixty-six ' ' Lyric Pieces ' ' for piano in ten books , Opp. 12 , 38 , 43 , 47 , 54 , 57 , 62 , 65 , 68 and 71 , including : ' ' Arietta ' ' , ' ' To the Spring ' ' , ' ' Little Bird ' ' , ' ' Butterfly ' ' , ' ' Notturno ' ' , ' ' Wedding Day at Troldhaugen ' ' , ' ' At Your Feet ' ' , ' ' Longing For Home ' ' , ' ' March of the Dwarfs ' ' , ' ' Pome rotique ' ' and ' 
 In traditional belief and fiction , a ghost ( sometimes known as a spectre ( British English ) or specter ( American English ) , phantom , apparition or spook ) is the soul or spirit of a dead person or animal that can appear , in visible form or other manifestation , to the living . Descriptions of the apparition of ghosts vary widely from an invisible presence to translucent or barely visible wispy shapes , to realistic , lifelike visions . The deliberate attempt to contact the spirit of a deceased person is known as necromancy , or in spiritism as a ' ' sance ' ' . The belief in manifestations of the spirits of the dead is widespread , dating back to animism or ancestor worship in pre-literate cultures . Certain religious practicesfuneral rites , exorcisms , and some practices of spiritualism and ritual magicare specifically designed to rest the spirits of the dead . Ghosts are generally described as solitary essences that haunt particular locations , objects , or people they were associated with in life , though stories of phantom armies , have also been recounted . The synonym ' ' spook ' ' is a Dutch loanword , akin to Low German ' ' spk ' ' ( of uncertain etymology ) ; it entered the English language via the United States in the 19th century . Alternative words in modern usage include ' ' spectre ' ' ( from Latin ' ' spectrum ' ' ) , the Scottish ' ' wraith ' ' ( of obscure origin ) , ' ' phantom ' ' ( via French ultimately from Greek ' ' phantasma ' ' , compare ' ' fantasy ' ' ) and ' ' apparition ' ' . The term ' ' shade ' ' in classical mythology translates Greek , or Latin ' ' umbra ' ' , in reference to the notion of spirits in the Greek underworld . Haint is a synonym for ghost used in regional English of the southern United States , and the haint tale is a common feature of southern oral and literary tradition . The term ' ' poltergeist ' ' is a German word , literally a noisy ghost moving and influencing objects . An association with the verb ' ' writhe ' ' was the etymology favored by J. R. R. Tolkien . Tolkien 's use of the word in the naming of the creatures known as the Ringwraiths has influenced later usage in fantasy literature . Bogey or ' ' bogy/bogie ' ' is a term for a ghost , and appears in Scottish poet John Mayne 's ' ' Hallowe'en ' ' in 1780 . A ' ' revenant ' ' is a deceased person returning from the dead to haunt the living , either as a disembodied ghost or alternatively as an animated ( undead ) corpse . Also related is the concept of a fetch , the visible ghost or spirit of a person yet alive . # Typology # # Anthropological context # A notion of the transcendent , supernatural or numinous , usually involving entities like ghosts , demons or deities , is a cultural universal . In pre-literate folk religions , these beliefs are often summarized under animism and ancestor worship . In many cultures malignant , restless ghosts are distinguished from worship typically involves rites intended to prevent revenants , vengeful spirits of the dead , imagined as starving and envious of the living . Strategies for preventing revenants may either include sacrifice , i.e. , giving the dead food and drink to pacify them , or magical banishment of the deceased to force them not to return . Ritual feeding of the dead is performed in traditions like the Chinese Ghost Festival or the Western All Souls ' Day . Magical banishment of the dead is present in many of the world 's burial customs . The bodies found in many tumuli ( kurgan ) had been ritually bound before burial , and the custom of binding the dead persists , for example , in rural Anatolia . Nineteenth-century anthropologist James Frazer stated in his classic work , ' ' The Golden Bough ' ' , that souls were seen as the creature within that animated the body . # Ghosts and the afterlife # Although the human soul was sometimes symbolically or literally depicted in ancient cultures as a bird or other animal , it appears to have been widely body in every feature , even down to clothing the person wore . This is depicted in artwork from various ancient cultures , including such works as the ' ' Egyptian Book of the Dead ' ' , which shows deceased people in the afterlife appearing much as they did before death , including the style of dress . # Fear of ghosts # While deceased ancestors are universally regarded as venerable , and often imagined as having a continued presence in some sort of afterlife , the spirit of a deceased person which remains present in the material world ( viz. a ghost ) is regarded as an unnatural or undesirable state of affairs and the idea of ghosts or revenants is associated with a reaction of fear . This is universally the case in pre-modern folk cultures , but fear of ghosts also remains an integral aspect of the modern ghost story , Gothic horror , and other horror fiction dealing with the supernatural . # Common attributes # Another widespread belief concerning ghosts is that they are composed of a misty , airy , or subtle material . the person within the person ( the person 's spirit ) , most noticeable in ancient cultures as a person 's breath , which upon exhaling in colder climates appears visibly as a white mist . This belief may have also fostered the metaphorical meaning of breath in certain languages , such as the Latin ' ' spiritus ' ' and the Greek ' ' pneuma ' ' , which by analogy became extended to mean the soul . In the Bible , God is depicted as synthesising Adam , as a living soul , from the dust of the Earth and the breath of God . In many traditional accounts , ghosts were often thought to be deceased people looking for vengeance ( vengeful ghosts ) , or imprisoned on earth for bad things they did during life . The appearance of a ghost has often been regarded as an omen or portent of death . Seeing one 's own ghostly double or fetch is a related omen of death . White ladies were reported to appear in many rural areas , and supposed to have died tragically or suffered the world . Common to many of them is the theme of losing or being betrayed by a husband or fianc . They are often associated with an individual family line or regarded as a harbinger of death similar to a banshee . Legends of ghost ships have existed since the 18th century ; most notable of these is the ' ' Flying Dutchman ' ' . This theme has been used in literature in ' ' The Rime of the Ancient Mariner ' ' by Coleridge . # Locale # A place where ghosts are reported is described as haunted , and often seen as being inhabited by spirits of deceased who may have been former residents or were familiar with the property . Supernatural activity inside homes is said to be mainly associated with violent or tragic events in the building 's past such as murder , accidental death , or suicide sometimes in the recent or ancient past . But not all hauntings are at a place of a violent death , or even on violent grounds . Many cultures and religions believe the essence of a being exist . Some religious views argue that the ' spirits ' of those who have died have not ' passed over ' and are trapped inside the property where their memories and energy are strong . # History # # Ancient Near East and Egypt # **33;8401;!-- **401;8436;!-- There are many references to ghosts in Mesopotamian religions the religions of Sumer , Babylon , Assyria and other early states in Mesopotamia . Traces of these beliefs survive in the later Abrahamic religions that came to dominate the region . The 5th-century BC play ' ' Oresteia ' ' contains one of the first ghosts to appear in a work of fiction . # #Roman Empire and Late Antiquity# # The ancient Romans believed a ghost could be used to exact revenge on an enemy by scratching a curse on a piece of lead or pottery and placing it into a grave . Plutarch , in the 1st century AD , described the haunting of the baths at Chaeronea by the ghost of a murdered man . The ghosts loud and frightful groans caused the people of the town to seal up a haunted house from the ancient classical world is given by Pliny the Younger ( c. 50 AD ) . Pliny describes the haunting of a house in Athens by a ghost bound in chains . The hauntings ceased when the ghost 's shackled skeleton was unearthed , and given a proper reburial . The writers Plautus and Lucian also wrote stories about haunted houses . In the New Testament , Jesus has to persuade the Disciples that he is not a ghost following the resurrection , Luke 24:3739 ( some versions of the Bible , such as the KJV and NKJV , use the term spirit ) . In a similar vein , Jesus ' followers at first believe him to be a ghost ( spirit ) when they see him walking on water . One of the first persons to express disbelief in ghosts was Lucian of Samosata in the 2nd century AD . In his tale The Doubter ( circa 150 AD ) he relates how Democritus the learned man from Abdera in Thrace lived in a tomb outside the city gates to prove that cemeteries were not how he persisted in his disbelief despite practical jokes perpetrated by some young men of Abdera who dressed up in black robes with skull masks to frighten him . This account by Lucian notes something about the popular classical expectation of how a ghost should look . In the 5th century AD , the Christian priest Constantius of Lyon recorded an instance of the recurring theme of the improperly buried dead who come back to haunt the living , and who can only cease their haunting when their bones have been discovered and properly reburied. # Middle Ages # Ghosts reported in medieval Europe tended to fall into two categories : the souls of the dead , or demons . The souls of the dead returned for a specific purpose . Demonic ghosts were those which existed only to torment or tempt the living . The living could tell them apart by demanding their purpose in the name of Jesus Christ . The soul of a dead person would divulge their mission , while a demonic ghost would be banished at the sound of the Holy Name . Most ghosts were to atone for their transgressions in life . Their penance was generally related to their sin . For example , the ghost of a man who had been abusive to his servants was condemned to tear off and swallow bits of his own tongue ; the ghost of another man , who had neglected to leave his cloak to the poor , was condemned to wear the cloak , now heavy as a church tower . These ghosts appeared to the living to ask for prayers to end their suffering . Other dead souls returned to urge the living to confess their sins before their own deaths . Medieval European ghosts were more substantial than ghosts described in the Victorian age , and there are accounts of ghosts being wrestled with and physically restrained until a priest could arrive to hear its confession . Some were less solid , and could move through walls . Often they were described as paler and sadder versions of the person they had been while alive , and dressed in tattered gray rags . The vast majority of reported sightings were male . There were night in the forest , or in the remains of an Iron Age hillfort , as at Wandlebury , near Cambridge , England . Living knights were sometimes challenged to single combat by phantom knights , which vanished when defeated . From the medieval period an apparition of a ghost is recorded from 1211 , at the time of the Albigensian Crusade . Gervase of Tilbury , Marshal of Arles , wrote that the image of Guilhem , a boy recently murdered in the forest , appeared in his cousin 's home in Beaucaire , near Avignon . This series of visits lasted all of the summer . Through his cousin , who spoke for him , the boy allegedly held conversations with anyone who wished , until the local priest requested to speak to the boy directly , leading to an extended disquisition on theology . The boy narrated the trauma of death and the unhappiness of his fellow souls in Purgatory , and reported that God was most pleased with the ongoing Crusade against the Cathar heretics , launched three years earlier . The time of the Albigensian Crusade , this constant bloodshed and dislocation of populations being the context for these reported visits by the murdered boy . Haunted houses are featured in the 9th-century ' ' Arabian Nights ' ' ( such as the tale of ' ' Ali the Cairene and the Haunted House in Baghdad ' ' ) . # European Renaissance to Romanticism # Renaissance magic took a revived interest in the occult , including necromancy . In the era of the Reformation and Counter Reformation , there was frequently a backlash against unwholesome interest in the dark arts , typified by writers such as Thomas Erastus . The Swiss Reformed pastor Ludwig Lavater supplied one of the most frequently reprinted books of the period with his ' ' Of Ghosts and Spirits Walking By Night . ' ' The Child ballad Sweet William 's Ghost ( 1868 ) recounts the story of a ghost returning to his fiance begging her to free him from his promise to marry her . He can not marry her because he is dead but her refusal would mean his damnation . This reflects a popular British belief that a new love without some formal release . The Unquiet Grave expresses a belief even more widespread , found in various locations over Europe : ghosts can stem from the excessive grief of the living , whose mourning interferes with the dead 's peaceful rest . In many folktales from around the world , the hero arranges for the burial of a dead man . Soon after , he gains a companion who aids him and , in the end , the hero 's companion reveals that he is in fact the dead man . Instances of this include the Italian fairy tale Fair Brow and the Swedish The Bird ' Grip ' . # Modern period of western culture # # #Spiritualist movement# # ----- EDITORIAL NOTE ----- -- **379;8839;!-- Spiritualism is a monotheistic belief system or religion , postulating a belief in God , but with a distinguishing feature of belief that spirits of the dead residing in the spirit world can be contacted by mediums , who can then provide information about the afterlife . By 1897 , it was said to have more than eight million followers the middle and upper classes , while the corresponding movement in continental Europe and Latin America is known as Spiritism . The religion flourished for a half century without canonical texts or formal organization , attaining cohesion by periodicals , tours by trance lecturers , camp meetings , and the missionary activities of accomplished mediums . Many prominent Spiritualists were women . Most followers supported causes such as the abolition of slavery and women 's suffrage . By the late 1880s , credibility of the informal movement weakened , due to accusations of fraud among mediums , and formal Spiritualist organizations began to appear . Spiritualism is currently practiced primarily through various denominational Spiritualist Churches in the United States and United Kingdom . # #Spiritism# # ---- EDITORIAL NOTE ---- -- **376;9220;!-- Spiritism , or French spiritualism , is based on the five books of the Spiritist Codification written by French educator Hypolite Lon Denizard Rivail under the pseudonym Allan Kardec reporting sances in which he observed a series of phenomena that he attributed to incorporeal intelligence ( spirits ) . His assumption of spirit communication was validated by many contemporaries and studied the phenomena . His work was later extended by writers like Leon Denis , Arthur Conan Doyle , Camille Flammarion , Ernesto Bozzano , Chico Xavier , Divaldo Pereira Franco , Waldo Vieira , Johannes Greber and others . Spiritism has adherents in many countries throughout the world , including Spain , United States , Canada , Japan , Germany , France , England , Argentina , Portugal and especially Brazil , which has the largest proportion and greatest number of followers . # Scientific view # The physician John Ferriar wrote ' ' An essay towards a theory of apparitions ' ' in 1813 in which he argued that sightings of ghosts were the result of optical illusions . Later the French physician Alexandre Jacques Franois Brire de Boismont published ' ' On Hallucinations : Or , the Rational History of Apparitions , Dreams , Ecstasy , Magnetism , and Somnambulism ' ' in 1845 in which he claimed sightings of ghosts were the result of hallucinations . David Turner , a retired physical chemist , suggested that ball lightning could cause inanimate objects to move erratically . that there was no credible scientific evidence that any location was inhabited by spirits of the dead . According to research in anomalistic psychology visions of ghosts may arise from hypnagogic hallucinations ( waking dreams which are experienced in the transitional states to and from sleep ) . In a study of two experiments into alleged hauntings ( Wiseman ' ' et al ' ' . 2003 ) came to the conclusion that people consistently report unusual experiences in haunted areas because of environmental factors , which may differ across locations . Some of these factors included the variance of local magnetic fields , size of location and lighting level stimuli of which witnesses may not be consciously aware . Some researchers , such as Michael Persinger of Laurentian University , Canada , have speculated that changes in geomagnetic fields ( created , e.g. , by tectonic stresses in the Earth 's crust or solar activity ) could stimulate the brain 's temporal lobes and produce many of the experiences associated with hauntings . Sound is thought to be another cause of supposed sightings . Richard Lord and Richard Wiseman have in a room , such as anxiety , extreme sorrow , a feeling of being watched , or even the chills . Carbon monoxide poisoning , which can cause changes in perception of the visual and auditory systems , was speculated upon as a possible explanation for haunted houses as early as 1921. # By religion # # Judo-Christian # The Hebrew Torah and the Bible contain a few references to ghosts , associating spiritism with forbidden occult activities . The most notable reference is in the First Book of Samuel , in which a disguised King Saul has the Witch of Endor summon the spirit/ghost of Samuel . In the New Testament , Jesus has to persuade the Disciples that He is not a ghost following the resurrection , Luke 24:3739 ( some versions of the Bible , such as the KJV and NKJV , use the term spirit ) . Similarly , Jesus ' followers at first believe Him to be a ghost ( spirit ) when they see him walking on water . Most of the Christian Church Some ghosts are actually said to be demons in disguise Timothy 4:1 , that they come to deceive people and draw them away from God and into bondage . As a result , attempts to contact the dead may lead to unwanted contact with a demon or an unclean spirit , as was said to occur in the case of Robbie Mannheim , a fourteen-year-old Maryland youth . The Seventh-Day Adventist view is that a soul is not equivalent to spirit or ghost ( depending on the Bible version ) , and that save for the Holy Spirit , all spirits/ghosts are demons in disguise . Furthermore , they teach that in accordance with ( Genesis 2:7 , Ecclesiastes 12:7 ) , there are only two components to a soul , neither of which survives death - with each returning to its respective source . Christadelphians reject the view of a living , conscious soul after death . The Talmud tells of a being called a shade that is similar to other creatures in that it lives and dies but consists only of a form but lacks matter that forms mass , thus rendering it invisible . Since it has no end of the world to the other . # Islam # According to Islamic teachings , there are no such thing as ghosts . Muslims believe that ' Ghosts ' are in fact jinns . The Koran discusses spirits known as jinns. # Buddhism # In Buddhism , there are a number of planes of existence into which a person can be reborn , one of which is the realm of hungry ghosts . # By culture # # African folklore # The Humr people of Sudan consume the drink Umm Nyolokh ; which is created from the liver and marrow of giraffes . Umm Nyolokh often contains DMT and other psychoactive substances from plants the giraffes eat such as Acacia ; and is known to cause hallucinations of giraffes , believed to be the giraffes ghosts by the Humr. # European folklore # Belief in ghosts in European folklore is characterized by the recurring fear of returning or ' ' revenant ' ' deceased who may harm the living . This includes the Scandinavian ' ' gjenganger ' ' , the Romanian ' ' strigoi ' ' , the Serbian vrykolakas ' ' , etc . In Scandinavian and Finnish tradition , ghosts appear in corporeal form and their supernatural nature is given away by behavior rather than appearance . In fact , in many stories they are first mistaken for the living . They may be mute , appear and disappear suddenly , or leave no footprints or other traces . British folklore is particularly notable for its numerous haunted locations . Belief in the soul and an afterlife remained near universal until the emergence of atheism in the 18th century . In the 19th century , spiritism resurrected belief in ghosts as the object of systematic inquiry , and popular opinion in Western culture remains divided . # South and Southeast Asia # # #India# # -- **378;9598;!-- A ' ' bhoot ' ' or ' ' bhut ' ' ( , , or ) is a supernatural creature , usually the ghost of a deceased person , in the popular culture , literature and some ancient texts of the Indian subcontinent . Interpretations of how ' ' bhoot ' ' s come into existence vary by region and and restless due to some factor that prevents them from moving on ( to transmigration , non-being , nirvana , or heaven or hell , depending on tradition ) . This could be a violent death , unsettled matters in their lives , or simply the failure of their survivors to perform proper funerals . In Central and Northern India , ' ' Aojha ' ' spirit guides play a central role . It duly happens when in the night someone sleeps and decorates something on the wall and they say that if one sees the spirit the next thing in the morning he will become a spirit to and that to a skondho kata which means a spirit without a head and the soul of the body will remain the dark with the dark lord from the spirits who reside in the body of every human in Central and Northern India . It is also believed that if someone calls one from behind never turn back and see because the spirit may catch the human to make it a spirit . Other types of spirits in Hindu Mythology include Baital possession of corpses , and Pishacha , a type of flesh-eating demon . # #Austronesia# # -- **378;9978;!-- There are many Malay ghost myths , remnants of old animist beliefs that have been shaped by later Hindu , Buddhist and Muslim influences in the modern states of Indonesia , Malaysia and Brunei . Some ghost concepts such as the female vampires Pontianak and Penanggalan are shared throughout the region . Ghosts are a popular theme in modern Malaysian and Indonesian films . There are also many references to Ghosts in Filipino culture , ranging from ancient legendary creatures such as the Manananggal and Tiyanak to more modern urban legends and horror films . The beliefs , legends and stories are as diverse as the people of the Philippines . There was widespread belief in ghosts in Polynesian culture , some of which persists today . After death , a person 's ghost normally traveled to the sky world or the underworld , but some could stay on earth . In many Polynesian legends , ghosts were often actively involved in the affairs of the living . Ghosts might also cause sickness be driven out through strong medicines . Phi Hua Kat , Phi Pop , Phi Phong , Phi Phraya and Mae Nak has its origins in Thai films that have now become classics . The most feared spirit in Thailand is Phi Tai Hong , the ghost of a person who has died suddenly of a violent death . The folklore of Thailand also includes the belief that sleep paralysis is caused by a ghost , Phi Am. # #Tibet# # ---- EDITORIAL NOTE ---- -- **378;10358;!-- There is widespread belief in ghosts in Tibetan culture . Ghosts are explicitly recognized in the Tibetan Buddhist religion as they were in Indian Buddhism , occupying a distinct but overlapping world to the human one , and feature in many traditional legends . When a human dies , after a period of uncertainty they may enter the ghost world . A hungry ghost ( Tibetan : ' ' yidag ' ' , ' ' yi-dvags ' ' ; Sanskrit : ' ' preta ' ' , ) has a tiny throat and huge stomach , and so can never be satisfied . Ghosts a spirit trap and burnt , thus releasing them to be reborn . Ghosts may also be exorcised , and an annual festival is held throughout Tibet for this purpose . Some say that Dorje Shugden , the ghost of a powerful 17th-century monk , is a deity , but the Dalai Lama asserts that he is an evil spirit , which has caused a split in the Tibetan exile community . # Americas # # #Mexico# # ---- EDITORIAL NOTE ---- -- **378;10738;!-- There is extensive and varied belief in ghosts in Mexican culture . The modern state of Mexico before the Spanish conquest was inhabited by diverse peoples such as the Maya and Aztec , and their beliefs have survived and evolved , combined with the beliefs of the Spanish colonists . The Day of the Dead incorporates pre-Columbian beliefs with Christian elements . Mexican literature and films include many stories of ghosts interacting with the living . # #United States# # According to the Gallup Poll News Service , belief in haunted houses , ghosts , communication with the dead , and witches had an especially steep increase about 32 percent of Americans believe in ghosts . # Depiction in the arts # Ghosts are prominent in the popular cultures of various nations . The ghost story is ubiquitous across all cultures from oral folktales to works of literature . # Renaissance to Romanticism ( 1500 to 1840 ) # One of the more recognizable ghosts in English literature is the shade of Hamlet 's murdered father in Shakespeares ' ' The Tragical History of Hamlet , Prince of Denmark ' ' . In ' ' Hamlet ' ' , it is the ghost who demands that Prince Hamlet investigate his murder most foul and seek revenge upon his usurping uncle , King Claudius . In Shakespeares ' ' Macbeth ' ' , the murdered Banquo returns as a ghost to the dismay of the title character . In English Renaissance theater , ghosts were often depicted in the garb of the living and even in armor , as with the ghost of Hamlets father . Armor , being out-of-date by the time of the Renaissance , gave the stage ghost a sense of antiquity . But the sheeted century because an armored ghost could not satisfactorily convey the requisite spookiness : it clanked and creaked , and had to be moved about by complicated pulley systems or elevators . These clanking ghosts being hoisted about the stage became objects of ridicule as they became clichd stage elements . Ann Jones and Peter Stallybrass , in ' ' Renaissance Clothing and the Materials of Memory ' ' , point out , In fact , it is as laughter increasingly threatens the Ghost that he starts to be staged not in armor but in some form of ' spirit drapery ' . An interesting observation by Jones and Stallybrass is that Ghosts figured prominently in traditional British ballads of the 16th and 17th centuries , particularly the Border Ballads of the turbulent border country between England and Scotland . Ballads of this type include ' ' The Unquiet Grave ' ' , ' ' The Wife of Usher 's Well ' ' , and ' ' Sweet William 's Ghost ' ' , which feature the recurring theme of returning dead lovers or children . In the ballad ' ' King kings horse and hounds before forcing the king into bed . The king then awakens to find the ghost transformed into a beautiful woman . One of the key early appearances by ghosts in a gothic tale was ' ' The Castle of Otranto ' ' by Horace Walpole in 1764 . Washington Irving 's short story ' ' The Legend of Sleepy Hollow ' ' ( 1820 ) , based on an earlier German folktale , features a Headless Horseman . It has been adapted for film and television many times , such as ' ' Sleepy Hollow ' ' , a successful 1999 feature film . # Victorian/Edwardian ( 1840 to 1920 ) # The classic ghost story arose during the Victorian period , and included authors such as M. R. James , Sheridan Le Fanu , Violet Hunt , and Henry James . Classic ghost stories were influenced by the gothic fiction tradition , and contain elements of folklore and psychology . M. R. James summed up the essential elements of a ghost story as , Malevolence and terror , the glare of evil faces , the stony , and ' long-drawn , distant screams ' , are all in place , and so is a modicum of blood , shed with deliberation and carefully husbanded ... . Famous literary apparitions from this period are the ghosts of ' ' A Christmas Carol ' ' , in which Ebenezer Scrooge is helped to see the error of his ways by the ghost of his former colleague Jacob Marley , and the ghosts of Christmas Past , Christmas Present and Christmas Yet to Come . Oscar Wilde 's comedy ' ' The Canterville Ghost ' ' has been adapted for film and television on several occasions . Henry James 's ' ' The Turn of the Screw ' ' has also appeared in a number of adaptations , notably the film ' ' The Innocents ' ' and Benjamin Britten 's opera ' ' The Turn of the Screw ' ' . Oscar Telgmann 's opera ' ' Leo , the Royal Cadet ' ' ( 1885 ) includes ' ' Judge 's Song ' ' about a ghost at the Royal Military College of Canada in Kingston , Ontario Things ' ' is a 1904 collection of Japanese ghost stories collected by Lafcadio Hearn , and later made into a film . In the United States , prior to and during the First World War , folklorists Olive Dame Campbell and Cecil Sharp collected ballads from the people of the Appalachian Mountains , which included ghostly themes such as ' ' The Wife of Usher 's Well ' ' , ' ' The Suffolk Miracle ' ' , ' ' The Unquiet Grave ' ' , and ' ' The Cruel Ship 's Carpenter ' ' . The theme of these ballads was often the return of a dead lover . These songs were variants of traditional British ballads handed down by generations of mountaineers descended from the people of the Anglo-Scottish border region . # Modern Era ( 1920 to 1970 ) # Professional parapsychologists and ghosts hunters , such as Harry Price , active in the 1920s and 1930s , and Peter Underwood , active in the 1940s and 1950s , published accounts of their experiences with ostensibly true ghost stories such as Price 's ' ' The 's ' ' Ghosts of Borley ' ' ( both recounting experiences at Borley Rectory ) . The writer Frank Edwards delved into ghost stories in his books of his , like Stranger than Science . Childrens benevolent ghost stories became popular , such as Casper the Friendly Ghost , created in the 1930s and appearing in comics , animated cartoons , and eventually a 1995 feature film . Nol Coward 's play ' ' Blithe Spirit ' ' , later made into a film , places a more humorous slant on the phenomenon of haunting of individuals and specific locations . With the advent of motion pictures and television , screen depictions of ghosts became common , and spanned a variety of genres ; the works of Shakespeare , Dickens and Wilde have all been made into cinematic versions . Novel-length tales have been difficult to adapt to cinema , although that of ' ' The Haunting of Hill House ' ' to ' ' The Haunting ' ' in 1963 is an exception . Sentimental depictions during this period were more popular in cinema than horror , and include ' ' , which was later adapted to television with a successful 196870 TV series . Genuine psychological horror films from this period include 1944 's ' ' The Uninvited ' ' , and 1945 's ' ' Dead of Night ' ' . # Post-modern ( 1970present ) # The 1970s saw screen depictions of ghosts diverge into distinct genres of the romantic and horror . A common theme in the romantic genre from this period is the ghost as a benign guide or messenger , often with unfinished business , such as 1989 's ' ' Field of Dreams ' ' , the 1990 film ' ' Ghost ' ' , and the 1993 comedy ' ' Heart and Souls ' ' . In the horror genre , 1980 's ' ' The Fog ' ' , and the ' ' A Nightmare on Elm Street ' ' series of films from the 1980s and 1990s are notable examples of the trend for the merging of ghost stories with scenes of physical violence . Popularised in such films as the 1984 comedy ' ' Ghostbusters ' ' , ghost societies to explore reportedly haunted places . The ghost hunting theme has been featured in reality television series , such as ' ' Ghost Adventures ' ' , ' ' Ghost Hunters ' ' , ' ' Ghost Hunters International ' ' , ' ' Ghost Lab ' ' , ' ' Most Haunted ' ' and ' ' A Haunting ' ' . It is also represented in children 's television by such programs as ' ' The Ghost Hunter ' ' and ' ' Ghost Trackers ' ' . Ghost hunting also gave rise to multiple guidebooks to haunted locations , and ghost hunting how-to manuals . The 1990s saw a return to classic gothic ghosts , whose dangers were more psychological than physical . Examples of films from this period include 1999 's ' ' The Sixth Sense ' ' and ' ' The Others ' ' . Asian cinema has also produced horror films about ghosts , such as the 1998 Japanese film ' ' Ringu ' ' ( remade in the US as ' ' The Ring ' ' in 2002 ) , and the Pang . Indian ghost movies are popular not just in India , but in the Middle East , Africa , South East Asia and other parts of the world . Some Indian ghost movies such as the comedy / horror film ' ' Chandramukhi ' ' have been commercial successes , dubbed into several languages . - something later echoed ( if with a less positive spin ) by C. G. Jung . Nick Harkaway considered that we all carry a host of ghosts in our heads , in the form of impressions of past acquaintances ghosts that represent our maps of other people in the world : our reference points . Object relations theory sees our personalities as formed by splitting off aspects of ourselves we find incompatible ; whereupon we may be haunted in later life by such ghosts of our alternate selves . 
 commonname = Latvia imagemap2 = Latvia - Location Map ( 2013 ) - LVA - UNOCHA.svg latd=56 latm=57 latNS=N longd=24 longm=6 longEW=E establishedevent1 = Declared <sup> b </sup> establisheddate8 = 1 May 2004 Latvia ( ; ) , officially the Republic of Latvia ( ) , is a country in the Baltic region of Northern Europe , one of the three Baltic states . It is bordered by Estonia , Lithuania , Russia , Belarus and by a maritime border to the west with Sweden . Latvia has 1,997,500 inhabitants and a territory of 64589km2 sqmi . The country has a temperate seasonal climate . Latvia is a democratic parliamentary republic established in 1918 . The capital city is Riga , the European Capital of Culture 2014 . Latvian is the official language . Latvia is a unitary state , divided into 118 administrative divisions of which 109 are municipalities and 9 are cities . There are five planning regions : Kurzeme , Latgale , Riga , Vidzeme and Zemgale . The Latvians are a Baltic people , culturally related to the Lithuanians . Latvians and Livs are language ; it and Lithuanian are the only two surviving Baltic languages . Despite foreign rule from the 13th to 20th centuries , the Latvian nation maintained its identity throughout the generations via the language and musical traditions . Latvia and Estonia share a long common history . As a consequence of the Soviet occupation both countries are home to a large number of ethnic Russians ( 26.9% in Latvia and 25.5% in Estonia ) , some of whom are non-citizens . Latvia is historically predominantly Protestant Lutheran , except for the Latgale region in the southeast , which has historically been predominantly Roman Catholic . The Republic of Latvia was founded on 18 November 1918 . However , its de facto independence was interrupted at the outset of World War II . In 1940 , the country was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union , invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany in 1941 , and re-occupied by the Soviets in 1944 to form the Latvian SSR for the next fifty years . The peaceful Singing Revolution , starting in 1987 , called for Baltic emancipation of Soviet rule . It , and Latvia declared the restoration of its de facto independence on 21 August 1991 . Latvia is a member of NATO , European Union , United Nations , Council of Europe , CBSS , IMF , NB8 , NIB , OSCE , and WTO . It is currently in the accession process for joining the OECD . For 2013 , Latvia is listed 44th on the Human Development Index and as a high income country . It used the Latvian lats as its currency until this was replaced by the euro on 1 January 2014. # Etymology # The name ' ' Latvija ' ' is derived from the name of the ancient Latgalians , one of four Indo-European Baltic tribes ( along with Couronians , Selonians and Semigallians ) , which formed the ethnic core of modern Latvians together with the Finnic Livonians. # History # Around 3000 BCE , the proto-Baltic ancestors of the Latvian people settled on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea . The Balts established trade routes to Rome and Byzantium , trading local amber for precious metals . By 900 CE , four Selonians , Semigallians ( in Latvian : ' ' kuri ' ' , ' ' latgai ' ' , ' ' si ' ' and ' ' zemgai ' ' ) , as well as the Livonians ( ' ' lbiei ' ' ) speaking a Finnic language . # The Medieval period # Although the local people had contact with the outside world for centuries , they were more fully integrated into European society in the 12th century . The first missionaries , sent by the Pope , sailed up the Daugava River in the late 12th century , seeking converts . The local people , however , did not convert to Christianity as readily as hoped . German crusaders were sent into Latvia to convert the population from their original pagan beliefs by force of arms . In the beginning of the 13th century , large parts of today 's Latvia were ruled by Germans . Together with Southern Estonia , these conquered areas formed the crusader state that became known as Terra Mariana or Livonia . In 1282 , Riga , and later the cities of Csis , Hanseatic League . and formed close cultural contacts with Western Europe . # The Reformation period # The 16th , 17th , and 18th centuries were a time of great change for the inhabitants of Latvia , including the reformation , the collapse of the Livonian state , and the time when the Latvian territory was divided up among foreign powers . After the Livonian War ( 15581583 ) , Livonia ( Latvia ) fell under Polish and Lithuanian rule . The southern part of Estonia and the northern part of Latvia were ceded to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and formed into the ' ' Ducatus Ultradunensis ' ' ( Prdaugavas hercogiste ) . Gotthard Kettler , the last Master of the Order of Livonia , formed the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia . Though the duchy was a vassal state to Poland , it retained a considerable degree of autonomy and experienced a golden age in the 17th century . Latgalia , the easternmost region of Latvia , became a part of the Polish district of Inflanty . The 17th and early 18th centuries saw a struggle between the the eastern Baltic . After the PolishSwedish War ( 16001611 ) , northern Livonia ( including Vidzeme ) came under Swedish rule . Riga became the capital of Swedish Livonia and the largest city in the entire Swedish Empire . Fighting continued sporadically between Sweden and Poland until the Truce of Altmark in 1629 . In Latvia , the Swedish period is generally remembered as positive ; serfdom was eased , a network of schools was established for the peasantry , and the power of the regional barons was diminished . Several important cultural changes occurred during this time . Under Swedish and largely German rule , western Latvia adopted Lutheranism as its main religion . The ancient tribes of the Couronians , Semigallians , Selonians , Livs and northern Latgallians assimilated to form the Latvian people , speaking one Latvian language . Throughout all the centuries , however , no such thing as a Latvian state existed so the borders and definitions of who exactly fell within that group are largely subjective . Meanwhile , largely isolated from the rest of Latvia , southern Latgallians adopted Catholicism under Polish/Jesuit influence many Polish and Russian loanwords. # Latvia in the Russian Empire ( 17101917 ) # The Capitulation of Estonia and Livonia in 1710 and the Treaty of Nystad , ending the Great Northern War in 1721 , gave Vidzeme to Russia ( it became part of the Governorate of Livonia During the Great Northern War ( 17001721 ) , up to 40 per cent of Latvians died from famine and plague . Half the residents of Riga were killed by plague in 17101711 . The promises Peter the Great made to the Baltic German nobility at the fall of Riga in 1710 , confirmed by the Treaty of Nystad and known as the Capitulations , largely reversed the Swedish reforms . Peter seriously considered moving Russian capital into Riga and visited Riga for several long stays ( he stayed in his own palace offered as a gift by Riga Magistrate together with keys from Riga ; palace purchased by him is still standing ; keys are exhibited in Moscow Kremlin museum ) . Curiously , Peter the Great 's wife Marta ( later Catherine I of Russia ) was the only the serfs took place in Courland in 1817 and in Vidzeme in 1819 . In practice , however , the emancipation was actually advantageous to the landowners and nobility , as it dispossessed peasants of their land without compensation , forcing them to return to work at the estates of their own free will . During the 19th century , the social structure changed dramatically . A class of independent farmers established itself after reforms allowed the peasants to repurchase their land , but many landless peasants remained . There also developed a growing urban proletariat and an increasingly influential Latvian bourgeoisie . The Young Latvian ( ) movement laid the groundwork for nationalism from the middle of the century , many of its leaders looking to the Slavophiles for support against the prevailing German-dominated social order . The rise in use of the Latvian language in literature and society became known as the First National Awakening . Russification began in Latgale after the Polish led the January Uprising in 1863 : this spread to the rest of what is now Latvia by the 1880s . The Young Latvians were largely and political movement , in the 1890s . Popular discontent exploded in the 1905 Russian Revolution , which took a nationalist character in the Baltic provinces . During these two centuries Latvia experienced economic and construction boom ports were expanded ( Riga became the largest port in the Russian Empire ) , railways built ; new factories , banks and University were established ; many residential , public ( theatres and museums ) and school buildings erected ; new parks formed ; etc . Riga 's boulevards and streets with beautiful buildings outside the Old Town date from this period . # Declaration of Independence # World War I devastated the territory of what would become the state of Latvia , including other western parts of the Russian Empire . Demands for self-determination were at first confined to autonomy , but the Russian 1917 Revolution , treaty with Germany at Brest-Litovsk , and allied armistice with Germany on 11 November 1918 , created a power vacuum . The People 's Council of Latvia proclaimed the independence of the new country in Riga on 18 November 1918 , with Krlis Ulmanis becoming Independence that followed was part of a general chaotic period of civil and new border wars in Eastern Europe . By the spring of 1919 , there were actually three governmentsUlmanis 's government ; the Latvian Soviet government led by Pteris Stuka , whose forces , supported by the Red Army , occupied almost all of the country ; and the Baltic German government of the United Baltic Duchy , headed by Andrievs Niedra and supported by the Baltische Landeswehr and the German Freikorps unit ' ' Iron Division ' ' . Estonian and Latvian forces A freely elected Constituent assembly convened on 1 May 1920 , and adopted a liberal constitution , the ' ' Satversme ' ' , in February 1922 . The constitution was partly suspended by Krlis Ulmanis after his coup in 1934 but reaffirmed in 1990 . Since then , it has been amended and is still in effect in Latvia today . With most of Latvia 's industrial base evacuated to the interior of Russia in 1915 , radical land reform was the central political question for the young state . In 1897 , 61.2% , that percentage had been reduced to 18% . By 1923 , the extent of cultivated land surpassed the pre-war level . Innovation and rising productivity led to rapid growth of the economy , but it soon suffered from the effects of the Great Depression . Latvia showed signs of economic recovery , and the electorate had steadily moved toward the centre during the parliamentary period . On 15 May 1934 , Ulmanis staged a bloodless coup , establishing a nationalist dictatorship that lasted until 1940 . After 1934 , Ulmanis established government corporations to buy up private firms with the aim of Latvianising the economy . # Latvia in World War II # Early in the morning of 24 August 1939 , the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed a 10-year non-aggression pact , called the MolotovRibbentrop Pact . The pact contained a secret protocol , revealed only after Germany 's defeat in 1945 , according to which the states of Northern and Eastern Europe were divided into German and Soviet spheres of influence . In the North , Latvia , Finland and Estonia were assigned to the Soviet sphere respective portions of Poland . After the conclusion of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact , most of the Baltic Germans left Latvia by agreement between Ulmanis ' government and Nazi Germany under the Heim ins Reich programme . In total 50,000 Baltic Germans left by the deadline of December 1939 , with 1,600 remaining to conclude business and 13,000 choosing to remain in Latvia . Most of those who remained left for Germany in summer 1940 , when a second resettlement On 5 October 1939 , Latvia was forced to accept a mutual assistance pact with the Soviet Union , granting the Soviets the right to station between 25,000 and 30,000 troops on Latvian territory . After staging border incidents , on 16 June 1940 the government of the USSR handed the Latvian ambassador in Moscow a note , in which Latvia was accused of breaching the articles of the agreement of 5 October 1939 , and demands were made for sending in additional Soviet troops and to change the government . The Latvian government capitulated in the face of overwhelming force . On 17 June Soviet troops invaded Latvian territory . In Soviet forces are marching into our land this very morning . This is happening with the knowledge and consent of the government , which in turn stems from the amicable relations that exist between Latvia and the Soviet Union . It is , therefore , my wish that the residents of our country also show friendship towards the advancing military units .. The government has resigned . I shall remain in my place , you remain in yours . # No opposition was shown towards the Soviet forces ; on the contrary , part of the population accepted the news of their arrival with enthusiasm , which was heavily exploited by Soviet propaganda . The well known Russian lawyer and public figure of Latvia , Pyotr Yakobi , wrote : # Taken from the German model , the authoritarian beginning in our country has turned into a government of national bureaucracy , having satisfied a limited circle of citizens , who have adapted themselves to the state pie . Clearly , any hardship is not in vain . And so now the down-trodden have raised their voice and demand a return Those unhappy with the regime of Krlis Ulmanis included people who were anxious about the deteriorating economic situation and had no desire to end up under Nazi German rule . State administrators were liquidated and replaced by Soviet cadres , in which 34,250 Latvians were deported or killed . Elections were held with single pro-Soviet candidates listed for many positions . The resulting people 's assembly immediately requested admission into the USSR , which the Soviet Union granted . Latvia , then a puppet government , was headed by Augusts Kirhenteins . The Soviet Union incorporated Latvia on 5 August 1940 , as The ' ' Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic . ' ' The Soviets dealt harshly with their opponents prior to the German invasion , in less than a year , at least 27,586 people were arrested . Most were deported for cooperating with the German army , and about 945 were shot . Under German occupation , Latvia was administered as part of ' ' Reichskommissariat Ostland ' ' . Latvian paramilitary and Auxiliary Police units established by the occupation authority participated in the Holocaust as well . More including approximately 75,000 Latvian Jews murdered during the Nazi occupation . Latvian soldiers fought on both sides of the conflict , including in the Latvian Legion of the Waffen-SS , most of them conscripted by the occupying Nazi and Soviet authorities . # Soviet era ( 19401941 , 19441991 ) # In 1944 , when Soviet military advances reached the area , heavy fighting took place in Latvia between German and Soviet troops , which ended in another German defeat . In the course of the war , both occupying forces conscripted Latvians into their armies , in this way increasing the loss of the nation 's live resources . In 1944 , part of the Latvian territory once more came under Soviet control . The Soviets immediately began to reinstate the Soviet system . After the German surrender , it became clear that Soviet forces were there to stay , and Latvian national partisans , soon joined by German collaborators , began to fight against the new occupier . Anywhere from 120,000 to as many as 300,000 Latvians took refuge from the Soviet army by fleeing to Germany and Sweden , with perhaps as many as 80,000 to 100,000 of them recaptured by the Soviets or , during few months immediately after the end of war , returned by the West . The Soviets reoccupied the country in 19441945 , and further deportations followed as the country was collectivised and Sovieticised . On 25 March 1949 , 43,000 rural residents ( kulaks ) and Latvian patriots ( nationalists ) were deported to Siberia in a sweeping Operation Priboi in all three Baltic states , which was carefully planned and approved in Moscow already on 29 January 1949 . An extensive programme to impose bilingualism was initiated in Latvia , limiting the use of Latvian language in official uses in favour of using Russian as the main language . All of the minority schools ( Jewish , Polish , Belorussian , Estonian , Lithuanian ) were closed down leaving only two media of instructions in the schools : Latvian and Russian . An influx of labourers , administrators , military personnel and their dependants from Russia and other Soviet republics started . By 1959 about 400,000 people arrived from other Soviet republics Since Latvia had maintained a well-developed infrastructure and educated specialists , Moscow decided to base some of the Soviet Union 's most advanced manufacturing in Latvia . New industry was created in Latvia , including a major machinery factory RAF in Jelgava , electrotechnical factories in Riga , chemical factories in Daugavpils , Valmiera and Olaineand some food and oil processing plants . Latvia manufactured trains , ships , minibuses , mopeds , telephones , radios and hi-fi systems , electrical and diesel engines , textiles , furniture , clothing , bags and luggage , shoes , musical instruments , home appliances , watches , tools and equipment , aviation and agricultural equipment and long list of other goods . Latvia had its own film industry and musical records factory ( LPs ) . However , there were not enough people to operate the newly built factories . To maintain and expand industrial production , skilled workers were migrating from all over the Soviet Union , decreasing the proportion of ethnic Latvians in the republic . Population of Latvia reached its peak in 1990 at just under 2.7 million people . half of the 1980s , Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev started to introduce political and economic reforms in the Soviet Union that were called glasnost and perestroika . In the summer of 1987 , the first large demonstrations were held in Riga at the Freedom Monumenta symbol of independence . In the summer of 1988 , a national movement , coalescing in the Popular Front of Latvia , was opposed by the Interfront . The Latvian SSR , along with the other Baltic Republics was allowed greater autonomy , and in 1988 , the old pre-war Flag of Latvia flew again , replacing the Soviet Latvian flag as the official flag in 1990 . In 1989 , the Supreme Soviet of the USSR adopted a resolution on the ' ' Occupation of the Baltic states ' ' , in which it declared the occupation not in accordance with law , and not the will of the Soviet people . Pro-independence Popular Front of Latvia candidates gained a two-thirds majority in the Supreme Council in the March 1990 democratic elections . On 4 May 1990 , the Supreme Soviet of the Latvian SSR Republic of Latvia , and the Latvian SSR was renamed Republic of Latvia . However , the central power in Moscow continued to regard Latvia as a Soviet republic in 1990 and 1991 . In January 1991 , Soviet political and military forces tried unsuccessfully to overthrow the Republic of Latvia authorities by occupying the central publishing house in Riga and establishing a Committee of National Salvation to usurp governmental functions . During the transitional period , Moscow maintained many central Soviet state authorities in Latvia . In spite of this , 73% of all Latvian residents confirmed their strong support for independence on 3 March 1991 , in a nonbinding advisory referendum . The Popular Front of Latvia advocated that all permanent residents be eligible for Latvian citizenship . However , universal citizenship for all permanent residents was not adopted . A majority of ethnic non-Latvians did not receive Latvian citizenship . Many of them were born in Latvia , but still became non-citizens . By 2011 , more than half of non-citizens had taken naturalisation exams and received Latvian citizenship . Still , today there are 290,660 non-citizens in no citizenship of any country , and can not vote in Latvia . The Republic of Latvia declared the end of the transitional period and restored full independence on 21 August 1991 , in the aftermath of the failed Soviet coup attempt . The Saeima , Latvia 's parliament , was again elected in 1993 . Russia ended its military presence by completing its troop withdrawal in 1994 and shutting down the Skrunda-1 radar station in 1998 . The major goals of Latvia in the 1990s , to join NATO and the European Union , were achieved in 2004 . Language and citizenship laws have been opposed by many Russophones . Citizenship was not automatically extended to former Soviet citizens who settled during the Soviet occupation , or to their offspring . Children born to non-nationals after the reestablishment of independence are automatically entitled to citizenship . Approximately 72% of Latvian citizens are Latvian , while 20% are Russian ; less than 1% of non-citizens are Latvian , while 71% are Russian . The government denationalised private property confiscated by the Soviet rule , returning it or compensating the owners for prewar currency . Albeit having experienced a difficult transition to a liberal economy and its re-orientation toward Western Europe . # Geography # Latvia lies in Northern Europe , on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea and northwestern part of the East European craton , between latitudes 55 and 58 N ( a small area is north of 58 ) , and longitudes 21 and 29 E ( a small area is west of 21 ) . Latvia has a total area of 64559 km2 of which 62157 km2 land , 18159 km2 agricultural land , 34964 km2 forest land and 2402 km2 inland water . The total length of Latvia 's boundary is 1866 km . The total length of its land boundary is 1368 km , of which 343 km is shared with Estonia to the north , 276 km with the Russian Federation to the east , 161 km with Belarus to the southeast and 588 km with Lithuania to the south . The total length of its maritime boundary is 498 km , which is shared with Estonia , Sweden and Lithuania . Extension from north 450 km . Most of Latvia 's territory is less than 100 m above sea level . Its largest lake Lubns is 80.7 km2 , its deepest lake Drdzis is 65.1 m . The longest river on Latvian territory is the Gauja , 452 km . The longest river flowing through Latvian territory is the Daugava , which has a total length 1,005 km of which 352 km on Latvian territory . Latvia 's highest point is Gaizikalns , 311.6 m . The length of Latvia 's Baltic coastline is 494 km . An inlet of the Baltic Sea , the shallow Gulf of Riga is situated in the northwest of the country . # Climate # Latvia has a temperate climate that has been described in various sources as either humid continental ( Kppen ' ' Dfb ' ' ) or oceanic/maritime ( Kppen ' ' Cfb ' ' . ) Coastal regions , especially the western coast of Courland Peninsula , possess a more maritime climate with cooler summers and milder winters , while eastern parts exhibit a more continental climate with warmer summers and harsher winters . Daugavpils lowest and highest temperatures ever recorded . Latvia has four pronounced seasons of near-equal length . Winter starts in mid-December and lasts until mid-March . Winters have average temperatures of -6C 0 and are characterized by stable snow cover , bright sunshine , and short days . Severe spells of winter weather with cold winds , extreme temperatures of around -30C 0 and heavy snowfalls are common . Summer starts in June and lasts until August . Summers are usually warm and sunny , with cool evenings and nights . Summers have average temperatures of around 19C 0 , with extremes of 35C 0 . Spring and autumn bring fairly mild weather . # Environment # Most of the country is composed of fertile lowland plains and moderate hills . In a typical Latvian landscape , a mosaic of vast forests alternates with fields , farmsteads , and pastures . Arable is spotted with birch groves and wooded clusters , which afford a habitat for numerous plants and animals . Latvia has hundreds of kilometres of undeveloped seashorelined by pine forests , dunes , and continuous white sand beaches . Latvia in the European Union , after Sweden , Finland , Estonia and Slovenia . Forests account for 3497000 ha or 56% of the total land area . Latvia has over 12,500 rivers , which stretch for 38000 km . Major rivers include the Daugava River , Lielupe , Gauja , Venta , and Salaca , the largest spawning ground for salmon in the eastern Baltics . There are 2,256 lakes that are bigger than 1 ha , with a collective area of 1000 km2 . Mires occupy 9.9% of Latvia 's territory . Of these , 42% are raised bogs ; 49% are fens ; and 9% are transitional mires . 70% percent of the mires are untouched by civilisation , and they are a refuge for many rare species of plants and animals . Agricultural areas account for 1815900 ha or 29% of the total land area . With the dismantling of collective farms , the area devoted to farming decreased dramatically now farms are predominantly small . Approximately 200 farms , occupying 2750 ha , are engaged in ecologically pure farming ( i.e. , using no artificial fertilisers or Park in Vidzeme ( since 1973 ) , emeri National Park in Zemgale ( 1997 ) , Sltere National Park in Kurzeme ( 1999 ) and Rzna National Park in Latgale ( 2007 ) . Latvia has a long tradition of conservation . The first laws and regulations were promulgated in the 16th and 17th centuries . There are 706 specially state-level protected natural areas in Latvia , of which : 4 national parks , 1 biosphere reserve , 42 nature parks , 9 areas of protected landscapes , 260 nature reserves , 4 strict nature reserves , 355 nature monuments , 7 protected marine areas and 24 microreserves . Nationally protected areas account for 12790 km2 or around 20% of Latvia 's total land area . Latvia 's Red Book ( Endangered Species List of Latvia ) , which was established in 1977 , contains 112 plant species and 119 animal species . Latvia has ratified the international Washington , Bern , and Ramsare conventions . The 2012 Environmental Performance Index ranks Latvia 2nd after Switzerland , based on the environmental performance of the country 's policies . **21;25330;gallery File:Kuldyga. widest waterfall in Europe and a natural monument of Latvia **42;25353;TOOLONG sandstone cliffs in Gauja National Park , Latvia 's largest and oldest national park File:Liela Kemeru taka 5jul03.JPGemeri National Park is home to mires , natural mineral-springs , muds and lakes that are former lagoons of the Littorina Sea File:Kolka , pl.jpgSltere National Park at Cape Kolka includes several Livonian fisherman villages of the Livonian Coast ( Livonian : ' ' Lvd Rnda ' ' ) </gallery> # Biodiversity # Approximately 27,700 species of flora and fauna have been registered in Latvia . Common species of wildlife in Latvia include deer , wild boar , moose , lynx , bear , fox , beaver and wolves . Non-marine molluscs of Latvia include 159 species . Species that are endangered in other European countries but common in Latvia include : black stork ( ' ' Ciconia nigra ' ' ) , corncrake ( ' ' Crex crex ' ' ) , lesser spotted eagle ( ' ' Aquila pomarina ' ' ) , white-backed woodpecker ( ' ' Picoides leucotos ' ' ) , crane ( ' ' Grus grus ' ' ' ) , Eurasian otter ( ' ' Lutra lutra ' ' ) , European wolf ( ' ' Canis lupus ' ' ) , and the European lynx ( ' ' Felis lynx ' ' ) . Phytogeographically , Latvia is shared between the Central European and Northern European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom . According to the WWF , the territory of Latvia belongs to the ecoregion of Sarmatic mixed forests . More than half of Latvia 's territory is covered by forests , mostly Scots Pine , birch and Norway Spruce . Several species of flora and fauna are considered national symbols . Oak ( ' ' Quercus robur ' ' , ) , and linden ( ' ' Tilia cordata ' ' , ) are Latvia 's national trees and the daisy ( ' ' Leucanthemum vulgare ' ' , ) its national flower . The white wagtail ( ' ' Motacilla alba ' ' , ) is Latvia 's national bird . Its national insect is the Two-spot Ladybird ( ' ' Adalia bipunctata ' ' , ) . Amber , important cultural symbols . In ancient times , amber found along the Baltic Sea coast was sought by Vikings as well as traders from Egypt , Greece and the Roman Empire . This led to the development of the Amber Road . Several Nature Reserves protect unspoiled landscapes with a variety of large animals . At Pape Nature Reserve , where European bison , wild horses and recreated aurochs have been reintroduced , one can find now an almost complete Holocene Megafauna including also moose , deer and wolf . # Regions and divisions # Latvia is a unitary state , currently divided into 110 one-level municipalities ( ) and 9 republican cities ( ) with their own city council and administration : Daugavpils , Jkabpils , Jelgava , Jrmala , Liepja , Rzekne , Riga , Valmiera and Ventspils . There are four historical and cultural regions in Latvia Courland , Latgale , Vidzeme , Zemgale , which are recognised in Constitution of Latvia . Selonia , a part of Zemgale , is sometimes considered culturally distinct region , but it is not part of any formal division . The definite and in several sources may vary . In formal divisions Riga region , which includes capital and parts of other regions that have strong relationship to capital , is also often included in regional divisions e.g. there are five planning regions of Latvia ( ) , which were created in 2009 to promote balanced development of all regions , under this division Riga region includes large parts of what traditionally is considered Vidzeme , Courland and Zemgale . Statistical regions of Latvia , established in accordance with EU Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics , duplicate this division , but divides Riga region into two parts with capital alone being a separate region . # Politics # The 100-seat unicameral Latvian parliament , the ' ' Saeima ' ' , is elected by direct popular vote every four years . The president is elected by the ' ' Saeima ' ' in a separate election , also held every four years . The president appoints a prime minister who , together with his cabinet , forms the executive branch of the government , which has to receive a confidence vote also existed before World War II . Highest civil servants are sixteen Secretaries of State . # Foreign relations # Latvia is a member of the United Nations , European Union , Council of Europe , NATO , OSCE , IMF and WTO . It is also a member of the Council of the Baltic Sea States and Nordic Investment Bank . It was a member of the League of Nations ( 19211946 ) . Latvia is part of the Schengen Area and joined the Eurozone on 1 January 2014 . Latvia holds accession talks with the OECD . Latvia has established diplomatic relations with 158 countries . It has 44 diplomatic and consular missions and maintains 34 embassies and 9 permanent representations abroad . There are 37 foreign embassies and 11 international organisations in Latvia 's capital Riga . Latvia hosts one European Union institution , the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications ( BEREC ) . Latvias foreign policy priorities include co-operation in the Baltic Sea region , European integration , active involvement in international organisations , contribution to European and transatlantic security and defence structures , participation co-operation , particularly the strengthening of stability and democracy in the EU 's Eastern Partnership countries . Since the early 1990s , Latvia is involved in active trilateral Baltic states co-operation with its neighbours Estonia and Lithuania , and Nordic-Baltic co-operation with the Nordic countries . The Baltic Council is the joint forum of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly ( BA ) and the intergovernmental Baltic Council of Ministers ( BCM ) . Nordic-Baltic Eight ( NB-8 ) is the joint co-operation of the governments of Denmark , Estonia , Finland , Iceland , Latvia , Lithuania , Norway and Sweden . Nordic-Baltic Six ( NB-6 ) , comprising Nordic-Baltic countries that are European Union member states , is a framework for meetings on EU-related issues . Interparliamentary co-operation between the Baltic Assembly and Nordic Council was signed in 1992 and since 2006 annual meetings are held as well as regular meetings on other levels . Joint Nordic-Baltic co-operation initiatives include the education programme NordPlus and mobility programmes for public administration , business and industry and culture . The Nordic Council of Ministers has an office in Riga . Latvia participates in Union initiatives to foster cross-border co-operation in the Baltic Sea region and Northern Europe . The secretariat of the Northern Dimension Partnership on Culture ( NDPC ) will be located in Riga . In 2013 Riga hosted the annual Northern Future Forum , a two-day informal meeting of the prime ministers of the Nordic-Baltic countries and the UK . The Enhanced Partnership in Northern Europe or ' ' e-Pine ' ' is the U.S. Department of State diplomatic framework for co-operation with the Nordic-Baltic countries . Latvia hosted the 2006 NATO Summit and since the annual Riga Conference has become a leading foreign and security policy forum in Northern Europe . Latvia will hold the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the first half of 2015. # Human rights # According to the reports by Freedom House and the US Department of State , human rights in Latvia are generally respected by the government : Latvia is ranked above-average among the world 's sovereign states in democracy , press freedom , privacy and human development . On the other hand , human rights organisations have reported multiple problems which was guaranteed basic rights under the constitution and international human rights laws ratified by the Latvian government . Non-citizens including stateless persons have limited access to some political rights only citizens are allowed to participate in parliamentary or municipal elections , although there are no limitations in regards to joining political parties or other political organizations . Additionally , there have been reports of police abuse of detainees and arrestees , poor prison conditions and overcrowding , judicial corruption , discrimination against women , incidents of violence against ethnic minorities , and societal violence and incidents of government discrimination against homosexuals . # Military # The National Armed Forces ( Latvian : ' ' Nacionlie Bruotie Spki ( NAF ) ' ' ) of Latvia consists of the Land Forces , Naval Forces , Air Force , National Guard , Special Tasks Unit , Military Police , NAF Staff Battalion , Training and Doctrine Command and Logistics Command . Latvia 's defence concept is based upon the Swedish-Finnish model of a rapid response force composed of a mobilisation base and a small group of career professionals . From 1 January . Latvia participates in international peacekeeping and security operations . Latvian armed forces have contributed to NATO and EU military operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina ( 19962009 ) , Albania ( 1999 ) , Kosovo ( 20002009 ) , Macedonia ( 2003 ) , Iraq ( 20052006 ) , Afghanistan ( since 2003 ) , Somalia ( since 2011 ) and Mali ( since 2013 ) . Latvia also took part in the US-led Multi-National Force operation in Iraq ( 20032008 ) and OSCE missions in Georgia , Kosovo and Macedonia . Latvian armed forces will contribute to a UK-led Battlegroup in 2013 and the Nordic Battlegroup in 2015 under the Common Security and Defence Policy ( CSDP ) of the European Union . Latvia acts as the lead nation in the coordination of the Northern Distribution Network for transportation of non-lethal ISAF cargo by air and rail to Afghanistan . It is part of the Nordic Transition Support Unit ( NTSU ) , which renders joint force contributions in support of Afghan security structures ahead of the withdrawal of Nordic and Baltic ISAF forces in 2014 . Since 1996 more of whom 7 soldiers perished . Per capita , Latvia is one of the largest contributors to international military operations . Latvian civilian experts have contributed to EU civilian missions : border assistance mission to Moldova and Ukraine ( 20052009 ) , rule of law missions in Iraq ( 2006 and 2007 ) and Kosovo ( since 2008 ) , police mission in Afghanistan ( since 2007 ) and monitoring mission in Georgia ( since 2008 ) . Since March 2004 , when the Baltic states joined NATO , fighter jets of NATO members are on rotational basis deployed for the Baltic Air Policing mission at iauliai Airport in Lithuania to guard the Baltic airspace . Latvia participates in several NATO Centres of Excellence : Civil-Military Co-operation in the Netherlands , Cooperative Cyber Defence in Estonia and Energy Security in Lithuania . It plans to establish the NATO Strategic Communications Centre of Excellence in Riga . Latvia co-operates with Estonia and Lithuania in several trilateral Baltic defence co-operation initiatives : * Baltic Battalion ' ' ( BALTBAT ) ' ' infantry battalion for participation in international peace support operations , headquartered ' ( BALTRON ) ' ' naval force with mine countermeasures capabilities , headquartered near Tallinn , Estonia ; * Baltic Air Surveillance Network ' ' ( BALTNET ) ' ' air surveillance information system , headquartered near Kaunas , Lithuania ; * Joint military educational institutions : Baltic Defence College in Tartu , Estonia , Baltic Diving Training Centre in Liepja , Latvia and Baltic Naval Communications Training Centre in Tallinn , Estonia . Future co-operation will include sharing of national infrastructures for training purposes and specialisation of training areas ' ' ( BALTTRAIN ) ' ' and collective formation of battalion-sized contingents for use in the NATO rapid-response force . In January 2011 , the Baltic states were invited to join NORDEFCO , the defence framework of the Nordic countries . In November 2012 , the three countries agreed to create a joint military staff in 2013. # Economy # Latvia is a member of the World Trade Organisation ( 1999 ) and the European Union ( 2004 ) . On 1 January 2014 , the Euro became the country 's currency , superseding the Lats . According to the introduction of the euro , while 52% opposed it . Following the introduction of the Euro , Eurobarometer surveys in January 2014 showed support for the Euro to be around 53% , close to the European average . Since the year 2000 , Latvia has had one of the highest ( GDP ) growth rates in Europe . However , the chiefly consumption-driven growth in Latvia resulted in the collapse of the Latvian GDP in late 2008 and early 2009 , exacerbated by the global economic crisis , shortage of credit and huge money resources needed for bailout of Parex bank . Latvian economy fell 18% in the first three months of 2009 , the biggest fall in the European Union . The economic crisis of 2009 proved earlier assumptions that the fast growing economy was heading for implosion of the economic bubble , because it was driven mainly by growth of domestic consumption , financed by a serious increase of private debt , as well as a negative foreign trade balance . The prices of real estate , which were at some points appreciating at approximately 5% a month economy , which mainly produces low-value goods and raw materials . Privatisation in Latvia is almost complete . Virtually all of the previously state-owned small and medium companies have been privatised , leaving only a small number of politically sensitive large state companies . The private sector accounted for nearly 68% of the country 's GDP in 2000 . Foreign investment in Latvia is still modest compared with the levels in north-central Europe . A law expanding the scope for selling land , including to foreigners , was passed in 1997 . Representing 10.2% of Latvia 's total foreign direct investment , American companies invested $127 million in 1999 . In the same year , the United States of America exported $58.2 million of goods and services to Latvia and imported $87.9 million . Eager to join Western economic institutions like the World Trade Organisation , OECD , and the European Union , Latvia signed a Europe Agreement with the EU in 1995with a 4-year transition period . Latvia and the United States have signed treaties on investment , trade , and intellectual property protection and avoidance of double taxation . Latvian economy entered a phase of fiscal contraction during the second half of 2008 after an extended period of credit-based speculation and unrealistic appreciation in real estate values . The national account deficit for 2007 , for example , represented more than 22% of the GDP for the year while inflation was running at 10% . Latvia 's unemployment rate rose sharply in this period from a low of 5.4% in November 2007 to over 22% . In April 2010 Latvia had the highest unemployment rate in the EU , at 22.5% , ahead of Spain , which had 19.7% . Paul Krugman , the Nobel Laureate in economics for 2008 , wrote in his New York Times Op-Ed column on 15 December 2008 : : The most acute problems are on Europes periphery , where many smaller economies are experiencing crises strongly reminiscent of past crises in Latin America and Asia : Latvia is the new Argentina However , by 2010 , commentators noted signs of stabilisation in the Latvian economy . Rating agency Standard &amp; Poor 's raised its outlook on Latvia 's debt from negative to stable . by 27% in late 2006 was in surplus in February 2010 . Kenneth Orchard , senior analyst at Moody 's Investors Service argued that : : The strengthening regional economy is supporting Latvian production and exports , while the sharp swing in the current account balance suggests that the countrys internal devaluation is working . The IMF concluded the First Post-Program Monitoring Discussions with the Republic of Latvia in July 2012 announcing that Latvias economy has been recovering strongly since 2010 , following the deep downturn in 200809 . Real GDP growth of 5.5 percent in 2011 was underpinned by export growth and a recovery in domestic demand . The growth momentum has continued into 2012 and 2013 despite deteriorating external conditions , and the economy is expected to expand by 4.1 percent in 2014 . The unemployment rate has receded from its peak of more than 20 percent in 2010 to around 9.3 percent in 2014. # Infrastructure # The transport sector is around 14% of GDP . Transit between Russia , Belarus , Kazakhstan as well as other Asian countries and the West is large . Three biggest ports Liepja . Most transit traffic uses these and half the cargo is crude oil and oil products . Free port of Ventspils is the busiest port in the Baltic states . Apart from road and railway connections , Ventspils is also linked to oil extraction fields and transportation routes of Russian Federation via system of two pipelines from Polotsk , Belarus . Riga International Airport is the busiest airport in the Baltic states with 4.7 million passengers in 2012 . It has direct flight to over 80 destinations in 30 countries . airBaltic is the Latvian flag carrier airline and a low-cost carrier . Latvia has three big hydroelectric power stations in Paviu HE S ( 825MW ) , Rgas HE S ( 402 MW ) and eguma HES-2 ( 192 MW ) . In the recent years a couple of dozen of wind farms as well as biogas or biomass power stations of different scale have been built in Latvia . Latvia operates Inukalns underground gas storage facility , one of the largest underground gas storage facilities in Europe and the only one in the Baltic states . Unique geological suitable for underground gas storage . # Demographics # The total fertility rate ( TFR ) in 2013 was estimated at 1.34 children born/woman , which is lower than the replacement rate of 2.1 . In 2012 , 45.0% of births were to unmarried women . The life expectancy in 2013 was estimated at 73.19 years ( 68.13 years male , 78.53 years female ) . # Ethnic groups # Latvia 's population has been multiethnic for centuries , though the demographics shifted dramatically in the 20th century due to the World Wars , the emigration and removal of Baltic Germans , the Holocaust , and occupation by the Soviet Union . According to the Russian Empire Census of 1897 , Latvians formed 68.3% of the total population of 1.93 million ; Russians accounted for 12% , Jews for 7.4% , Germans for 6.2% , and Poles for 3.4% . As of March 2011 , Latvians and Livonians ( about 400 people ) , the indigenous peoples of Latvia , form about 62.1% of the population , while 26.9% are Russians , Belarusians 3.3% , Ukrainians 2.2% , Poles 2.2% , Germans 0.1% , Estonians 0.1% and others 1.3% . There were 290,660 non-citizens living in Latvia or 14.1% of Latvian residents , mainly ethnic Russians who arrived after the occupation of 1940 and their descendants . In some cities , e.g. Daugavpils and Rzekne , ethnic Latvians constitute a minority of the total population . Despite the fact that the proportion of ethnic Latvians has been steadily increasing for more than a decade , ethnic Latvians also make up slightly less than a half of the population of the capital city of Latvia Rga . The share of ethnic Latvians had fallen from 77% ( 1,467,035 ) in 1935 to 52% ( 1,387,757 ) in 1989 . In 2011 there were even fewer Latvians than in 1989 , though their share of the population was larger 1,284,194 ( 62.1% of the population ) . # Language # The sole official language of Latvia is Latvian , which belongs to the Baltic language group of the Indo-European language family . Another notable language of Latvia is the nearly extinct Livonian language of the Finnic branch of the Uralic language family , which or distinct separate language of Latvian is also formally protected by Latvian law but only as a historical variation of the Latvian language . Russian , which was widely spoken during the Soviet period , is still the most widely used minority language by far ( about 34% speak it at home , including persons who are not ethnically Russian ) . While it is now required that all school students learn Latvian , most schools also include English and either German or Russian in their curricula . The English language is widely accepted in Latvia , especially in business and tourism . As of 2014 there are 109 schools for minorities that use Russian as the language of instruction for 40% of subjects ( the rest 60% of subjects are taught in Latvian ) , however Latvian government is planning to completely abolish Russian as the language of instruction by 2018 . On 18 February 2012 , Latvia held a constitutional referendum on whether to adopt Russian as a second official language . According to the Central Election Commission , 74.8% voted against , 24.88% voted for and the voter Latvia 's Russian speaking community ( 290,660 or 14.1% of Latvia 's entire population ) could not vote in this referendum because they hold non-citizen status and thus have no right to vote . # Religion # The largest religion in Latvia is Christianity , though only about 7% of the population attends religious services regularly . The largest groups as of 2011 were : * Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia 708,773 *Russian Orthodox 370,000 The country 's Orthodox Christians belong to the Latvian Orthodox Church , a semi-autonomous body within the Russian Orthodox Church . In 2011 , there were 416 Jews and 319 Muslims living in Latvia . There are more than 600 Latvian neopagans , ' ' Dievturi ' ' ( The Godskeepers ) , whose religion is based on Latvian mythology . About 21% of the total population is not affiliated with a specific religion . # Education # Riga Technical University and University of Latvia are two major universities in the country , both been established on the basis of Riga Polytechnical Institute and located in Riga . Another two important universities , which were established Latvia University of Agriculture ( established in 1939 on the basis of the Faculty of Agriculture ) and Riga Stradi University ( established in 1950 on the basis of the Faculty of Medicine ) both nowadays cover a variety of different fields . Daugavpils University is another significant centre of education . Latvia closed 131 schools between 2006 and 2010 , which is a 12.9% decline , and in the same period enrolment in educational institutions has fallen by over 54,000 people , a 10.3% decline . # Health # The Latvian healthcare system is a universal programme , largely funded through government taxation . It is among the lowest-ranked healthcare systems in Europe , due to excessive waiting times for treatment , insufficient access to the latest medicines , and other factors . There were 59 hospitals in Latvia in 2009 , down from 94 in 2007 , and 121 in 2006 . Corruption is relatively widespread in the Latvian healthcare system , though the situation has improved since the early 1990s . It has been noted that an environment conducive to corruption has been promulgated by low salaries and drain , mostly to Western EU nations . As of 2009 , there were approximately 8,600 inhabitants of Latvia living with HIV/AIDS , accounting for a 0.7% adult HIV prevalence rate . There were 32,376 ( 1.44% ) individual instances of clinically reported alcoholism in Latvia in 2008 , as well as cases of addictions to other substances . The annual number of births per 1,000 adolescent women aged 15 to 19 has declined from 49.9 in 1990 to 17.9 in 2007 . In 2005 , Latvia had a suicide rate of 24.5 per 100,000 inhabitants ( down from 40.7 in 1995 ) , the 7th highest in the world . # Culture # Traditional Latvian folklore , especially the dance of the folk songs , date back well over a thousand years . More than 1.2 million texts and 30,000 melodies of folk songs have been identified . Between the 13th and 19th centuries , Baltic Germans , many of whom were originally of non-German ancestry but had been assimilated into German culture , formed the upper class . They developed distinct cultural heritage , characterised by both Latvian and to this day , in spite of their dispersal to Germany , the USA , Canada and other countries in the early 20th century . However , most indigenous Latvians did not participate in this particular cultural life . Thus , the mostly peasant local pagan heritage was preserved , partly merging with Christian traditions . For example , one of the most popular celebrations is Ji , a pagan celebration of the summer solsticewhich Latvians celebrate on the feast day of St. John the Baptist . In the 19th century , Latvian nationalist movements emerged . They promoted Latvian culture and encouraged Latvians to take part in cultural activities . The 19th century and beginning of the 20th century is often regarded as a classical era of Latvian culture . Posters show the influence of other European cultures , for example , works of artists such as the Baltic-German artist Bernhard Borchert and the French Raoul Dufy . With the onset of World War II , many Latvian artists and other members of the cultural elite fled the country yet continued to produce their work , largely for a Latvian important event in Latvian culture and social life . It has been held since 1873 , normally every five years . Approximately 30,000 performers altogether participate in the event . Although usually folksongs and classical choir songs are sung , with emphasis on a cappella singing , recently modern popular songs have been incorporated into the repertoire as well . After incorporation into the Soviet Union , Latvian artists and writers were forced to follow the Socialist realism style of art . During the Soviet era , music became increasingly popular , with the most popular being songs from the 1980s . At this time , songs often made fun of the characteristics of Soviet life and were concerned about preserving Latvian identity . This aroused popular protests against the USSR and also gave rise to an increasing popularity of poetry . Since independence , theatre , scenography , choir During July 2014 , Riga will host the 8th World Choir Games as it plays host to over 27 000 choristers representing over 450 choirs and over 70 countries . The festival is the biggest of its kind in the world city . # Cuisine # Latvian cuisine typically consists of agricultural products , with meat featuring in most main meal dishes . Fish is commonly consumed due to Latvia 's location on the Baltic Sea . Latvian cuisine has been influenced by the neighbouring countries . Common ingredients in Latvian recipes are found locally , such as potatoes , wheat , barley , cabbage , onions , eggs and pork . Latvian food is generally quite fatty , and uses few spices . Grey peas and ham are generally considered as staple foods of Latvians . Sorrel soup is also consumed by Latvians . Rupjmaize is a dark bread made from rye , considered the national staple. # Sport # Ice hockey is usually considered the most popular sport in Latvia . Latvia has had many famous hockey stars like Helmut Balderis , Artrs Irbe , Krlis Skrasti and Sandis Ozoli among others . Dinamo Riga is the country 's strongest hockey club , playing in the Kontinental Hockey League . The 2006 IIHF World Championship was held in Riga , Latvia . The second most popular sport is basketball . Biedri who plays in the NBA . Latvia has a long basketballing tradition , as the Latvian national basketball team won the first ever EuroBasket in 1935 and silver medals in 1939 , after losing an impressively tenacious final to fellow Balts Lithuanians by one point . Latvia had many European basketball stars like Jnis Krmi , Maigonis Valdmanis , Valdis Muinieks , Valdis Valters , Igors Miglinieks , as well as the first Latvian NBA player Gundars Vtra . Former Latvian basketball club ASK Riga won prestigious Euroleague tournament three times in a row before being defunct . Currently , VEF Rga , which competes in EuroCup , is the strongest professional basketball club in Latvia . BK Ventspils , which participates in EuroChallenge , is the second strongest basketball club in Latvia , previously winning LBL eight times and BBL in 2013 . Other popular sports include volleyball , floorball , football , tennis , cycling and bobsleigh . The Latvian national football team participated in 2004 UEFA Euro for the first time . Latvia has participated successfully in both Winter and Summer Olympics . The most successful Olympic trombergs , who became a two-time Olympic champion in 2008 and 2012 at Men 's BMX. # International rankings # The following are links to international rankings of Latvia . According to speedtest.net Latvia has one of the fastest Internet download and upload speeds in the world with an average download speed of 28.71 Mbit/s and upload speed of 18.84 Mbit/s. 
 # Events # *1527 &amp;ndash ; Spanish and German troops sack Rome ; some consider this the end of the Renaissance . 147 Swiss Guards , including their commander , die fighting the forces of Charles V in order to allow Pope Clement VII to escape into Castel Sant'Angelo. *1536 &amp;ndash ; The Siege of Cuzco commences , in which Incan forces attempt to retake the city of Cuzco from the Spanish . * 1536 &amp;ndash ; King Henry VIII orders English-language Bibles be placed in every church . *1542 &amp;ndash ; Francis Xavier reaches Old Goa , the capital of Portuguese India at the time . *1659 &amp;ndash ; English Restoration : A faction of the British Army removes Richard Cromwell as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth and reinstalls the Rump Parliament . *1682 &amp;ndash ; Louis XIV moves his court to the Palace of Versailles . *1757 &amp;ndash ; Battle of Prague &amp;ndash ; A Prussian army fights an Austrian army in Prague during the Seven Years ' War . * 1757 &amp;ndash ; The end of KonbaungHanthawaddy War , and the end of Burmese Civil poet Christopher Smart is admitted into St Luke 's Hospital for Lunatics in London , beginning his six-year confinement to mental asylums. *1782 &amp;ndash ; Construction begins on the Grand Palace , the royal residence of the King of Siam in Bangkok , at the command of King Buddha Yodfa Chulaloke. *1801 &amp;ndash ; Captain Thomas Cochrane in the 14-gun captures the 32-gun Spanish frigate ' ' El Gamo ' ' . *1835 &amp;ndash ; James Gordon Bennett , Sr. publishes the first issue of the ' ' New York Herald ' ' . *1840 &amp;ndash ; The Penny Black postage stamp becomes valid for use in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland *1844 &amp;ndash ; The Glaciarium , the world 's first mechanically frozen ice rink , opens . *1857 &amp;ndash ; The British East India Company disbands the 34th Regiment of Bengal Native Infantry whose sepoy Mangal Pandey had earlier revolted against the British and is considered to be the First Martyr in the War of Indian Independence . *1861 &amp;ndash ; American Civil War : Arkansas secedes from the Union . * 1861 &amp;ndash ; American capital of the Confederate States of America . *1863 &amp;ndash ; American Civil War : The Battle of Chancellorsville ends with the defeat of the Army of the Potomac by Confederate troops . *1877 &amp;ndash ; Chief Crazy Horse of the Oglala Sioux surrenders to United States troops in Nebraska . *1882 &amp;ndash ; Thomas Henry Burke and Lord Frederick Cavendish are stabbed and killed during the Phoenix Park Murders in Dublin . * 1882 &amp;ndash ; The United States Congress passes the Chinese Exclusion Act . *1889 &amp;ndash ; The Eiffel Tower is officially opened to the public at the Universal Exposition in Paris . *1902 &amp;ndash ; Macario Sakay establishes the Tagalog Republic with himself as President . *1910 &amp;ndash ; George V becomes King of the United Kingdom upon the death of his father , Edward VII . *1916 &amp;ndash ; Twenty-one Lebanese nationalists executed in the Martyrs ' Square , Beirut by Jamal Pasha , the Ottoman wli. *1933 &amp;ndash ; The Deutsche Studentenschaft attacked Magnus Hirschfeld 's Institut fr Sexualwissenschaft , later burning many of its books . *1935 &amp;ndash ; New Deal : Executive Order ; The first flight of the Curtiss P-36 Hawk . *1937 &amp;ndash ; Hindenburg disaster : The German zeppelin ' ' Hindenburg ' ' catches fire and is destroyed within a minute while attempting to dock at Lakehurst , New Jersey . Thirty-six people are killed . *1940 &amp;ndash ; John Steinbeck is awarded the Pulitzer Prize for his novel ' ' The Grapes of Wrath ' ' . *1941 &amp;ndash ; At California 's March Field , Bob Hope performs his first USO show . * 1941 &amp;ndash ; The first flight of the Republic P-47 Thunderbolt . *1942 &amp;ndash ; World War II : On Corregidor , the last American forces in the Philippines surrender to the Japanese . *1945 &amp;ndash ; World War II : Axis Sally delivers her last propaganda broadcast to Allied troops . * 1945 &amp;ndash ; World War II : The Prague Offensive , the last major battle of the Eastern Front , begins . *1949 &amp;ndash ; EDSAC , the first practical electronic digital stored-program computer , runs its first operation . *1954 &amp;ndash ; Roger Bannister becomes the first person to run More than 20 million viewers watch the first televised royal wedding when Princess Margaret marries Anthony Armstrong-Jones at Westminster Abbey . *1962 &amp;ndash ; St. Martn de Porres is canonized by Pope John XXIII. *1966 &amp;ndash ; Myra Hindley and Ian Brady are sentenced to life imprisonment for the Moors murders in England . *1972 &amp;ndash ; Deniz Gezmi , Yusuf Aslan and Hseyin nan are executed in Ankara for attempting to overthrow the Constitutional order . *1976 &amp;ndash ; An earthquake strikes the Friuli region of northeastern Italy , causing 989 deaths and the destruction of entire villages . *1981 &amp;ndash ; A jury of architects and sculptors unanimously selects Maya Ying Lin 's design for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial from 1,421 other entries . *1983 &amp;ndash ; The Hitler Diaries are revealed as a hoax after examination by experts . *1984 &amp;ndash ; One hundred three Korean Martyrs are canonized by Pope John Paul II in Seoul . *1989 &amp;ndash ; Cedar Point opens Magnum XL-200 , the first roller coaster to break the 200 ft height barrier , therefore spawning what is known as the coaster wars . and French President Franois Mitterrand officiate at the opening of the Channel Tunnel . * 1994 &amp;ndash ; Former Arkansas state worker Paula Jones files a lawsuit against United States President Bill Clinton , alleging that he had sexually harassed her in 1991. *1996 &amp;ndash ; The body of former CIA director William Colby is found washed up on a riverbank in southern Maryland , eight days after he disappeared . *1997 &amp;ndash ; The Bank of England is given independence from political control , the most significant change in the bank 's 300-year history . *1998 &amp;ndash ; Kerry Wood strikes out 20 Houston Astros to tie the major league record held by Roger Clemens . He threw a one-hitter and did not walk a batter in his 5th career start . *1999 &amp;ndash ; The first elections to the devolved Scottish Parliament and Welsh Assembly are held . *2001 &amp;ndash ; During a trip to Syria , Pope John Paul II becomes the first pope to enter a mosque . *2004 &amp;ndash ; The series finale of the television sitcom Friends is aired on NBC . The finale attracts television series finale in U.S. history . *2013 &amp;ndash ; Three women missing for more than a decade are found alive in the U.S. city of Cleveland , Ohio . Ariel Castro , is taken into custody . *2014 &amp;ndash ; Six people are injured in a knife attack at a Chinese train station in Guangzhou. # Births # *1405 &amp;ndash ; Skanderbeg , Albanian lord ( d. 1468 ) *1501 &amp;ndash ; Pope Marcellus II ( d. 1555 ) *1574 &amp;ndash ; Pope Innocent X ( d. 1655 ) *1635 &amp;ndash ; Johann Joachim Becher ( d. 1682 ) *1668 &amp;ndash ; Alain-Ren Lesage , French author and playwright ( d. 1747 ) *1680 &amp;ndash ; Jean-Baptiste Stuck , Italian-French cellist and composer ( d. 1755 ) *1713 &amp;ndash ; Charles Batteux , French philosopher ( d. 1780 ) *1714 &amp;ndash ; Anton Raaff , German tenor ( d. 1797 ) *1742 &amp;ndash ; Jean Senebier , Swiss physiologist ( d. 1809 ) *1758 &amp;ndash ; Maximilien de Robespierre , French lawyer and politician ( d. 1794 ) * 1758 &amp;ndash ; Andr Massna , French general ( d. 1817 Tuscany ( d. 1824 ) * 1769 &amp;ndash ; Jean Nicolas Pierre Hachette , French mathematician ( d. 1834 ) *1781 &amp;ndash ; Karl Christian Friedrich Krause , German philosopher ( d. 1832 ) *1797 &amp;ndash ; Joseph Brackett , American religious leader and composer ( d. 1882 ) *1800 &amp;ndash ; Roman Sanguszko , Polish general ( d. 1881 ) *1827 &amp;ndash ; Hermann Raster , German-American journalist and politician ( d. 1891 ) *1836 &amp;ndash ; Max Eyth , German engineer and writer ( d. 1906 ) *1843 &amp;ndash ; Grove Karl Gilbert , American geologist ( d. 1918 ) *1848 &amp;ndash ; Henry Edward Armstrong , English chemist ( d. 1937 ) *1851 &amp;ndash ; Aristide Bruant , French singer and actor ( d. 1925 ) *1856 &amp;ndash ; Sigmund Freud , Austrian neurologist ( d. 1939 ) * 1856 &amp;ndash ; Robert Peary , American explorer ( d. 1920 ) *1861 &amp;ndash ; Motilal Nehru , Indian lawyer and politician ( d. 1931 ) *1868 &amp;ndash ; Gaston Leroux , French journalist and author ( d. 1927 ) *1870 &amp;ndash ; Walter Rutherford , Scottish golfer ( chemist and academic , Nobel Prize laureate ( d. 1935 ) * 1871 &amp;ndash ; Christian Morgenstern , German author ( d. 1914 ) *1872 &amp;ndash ; Willem de Sitter , Dutch mathematician , physicist , and astronomer ( d. 1934 ) *1879 &amp;ndash ; Bedich Hrozn , Czech orientalist and linguist ( d. 1952 ) * 1879 &amp;ndash ; Hendrik van Heuckelum , Dutch footballer ( d. 1929 ) *1880 &amp;ndash ; Winifred Brunton , English-South African painter ( d. 1959 ) * 1880 &amp;ndash ; Ernst Ludwig Kirchner , German painter ( d. 1938 ) * 1880 &amp;ndash ; William Joseph Simmons , American Ku Klux Klan leader ( d. 1945 ) *1882 &amp;ndash ; Wilhelm , German Crown Prince ( d. 1951 ) *1895 &amp;ndash ; Jlio Csar de Mello e Souza , Brazilian mathematician and author ( d. 1974 ) *1896 &amp;ndash ; Rolf Maximilian Sievert , Swedish physicist and academic ( d. 1966 ) * 1895 &amp;ndash ; Fidl Plffy , Hungarian politician ( d. 1946 ) * 1895 &amp;ndash ; Rudolph Valentino , Italian-American actor ( d. 1926 ) *1897 &amp;ndash ; Paul Alverdes , ; Konrad Henlein , Czech politician ( d. 1945 ) *1899 &amp;ndash ; Billy Cotton , English drummer and bandleader ( d. 1969 ) *1902 &amp;ndash ; Harry Golden , Ukrainian-American journalist and author ( d. 1981 ) * 1902 &amp;ndash ; Max Ophls , German director and screenwriter ( d. 1957 ) *1903 &amp;ndash ; Toots Shor , American businessman , founded Toots Shor 's Restaurant ( d. 1977 ) *1904 &amp;ndash ; Raymond Bailey , American actor ( d. 1980 ) * 1904 &amp;ndash ; Mosh Feldenkrais , Ukrainian-Israeli physicist ( d. 1984 ) * 1904 &amp;ndash ; Harry Martinson , Swedish author and poet Nobel Prize laureate ( d. 1978 ) * 1904 &amp;ndash ; Catherine Lacey , English actress ( d. 1979 ) *1906 &amp;ndash ; Andr Weil , French mathematician and academic ( d. 1998 ) *1907 &amp;ndash ; Weeb Ewbank , American football player and coach ( d. 1998 ) *1909 &amp;ndash ; Loyd Sigmon , American radio host ( d. 2004 ) *1911 &amp;ndash ; Guy des Cars , French author ( d. 1993 ) * 1911 &amp;ndash ; Frank Nelson , American actor American pianist ( d. 1989 ) * 1913 &amp;ndash ; Stewart Granger , English-American actor ( d. 1993 ) *1915 &amp;ndash ; Orson Welles , American actor , director , producer , and screenwriter ( d. 1985 ) * 1915 &amp;ndash ; Theodore H. White , American historian , journalist , and author ( d. 1986 ) *1916 &amp;ndash ; Robert H. Dicke , American physicist ( d. 1997 ) * 1916 &amp;ndash ; Sif Ruud , Swedish actress ( d. 2011 ) * 1916 &amp;ndash ; Adriana Caselotti , American voice actress and singer ( d. 1997 ) *1917 &amp;ndash ; Kal Mann , American songwriter ( d. 2001 ) * 1917 &amp;ndash ; Jilly Rizzo , American businessman and actor ( d. 1992 ) *1920 &amp;ndash ; Martha Beck , American murderer ( d. 1951 ) * 1920 &amp;ndash ; Ross Hunter , American actor and producer ( d. 1996 ) * 1920 &amp;ndash ; Kamisese Mara , Fijian politician , 1st Prime Minister of Fiji ( d. 2004 ) *1921 &amp;ndash ; Erich Fried , German author ( d. 1988 ) *1922 &amp;ndash ; Vladimir Etush , Russian and politician ( d. 1999 ) *1923 &amp;ndash ; Harry Watson , Canadian ice hockey player and coach ( d. 2002 ) *1924 &amp;ndash ; Nestor Basterretxea , Spanish painter and sculptor ( d. 2014 ) * 1924 &amp;ndash ; Patricia Kennedy Lawford , American daughter of Joseph P. Kennedy , Sr. ( d. 2006 ) * 1924 &amp;ndash ; Denny Wright , English guitarist , composer , and producer ( d. 1992 ) *1926 &amp;ndash ; Gilles Grgoire , Canadian politician , co-founded the Parti Qubcois ( d. 2006 ) * 1926 &amp;ndash ; Marguerite Piazza , American soprano ( d. 2012 ) *1929 &amp;ndash ; Rosemary Cramp , English archaeologist and academic * 1929 &amp;ndash ; Paul Lauterbur , American chemist and biophysicist , Nobel Prize laureate ( d. 2007 ) * 1929 &amp;ndash ; John Taylor , English bishop and theologian *1930 &amp;ndash ; Sonia Rykiel , French fashion designer *1931 &amp;ndash ; Willie Mays , American baseball player *1932 &amp;ndash ; Alexander Thynn , 7th Marquess of Bath , English politician * 1932 &amp;ndash ; Ahmet Haxhiu , Albanian political activist ( d. 1994 ) *1934 &amp;ndash ; Bernard Lemaire , Canadian businessman *1937 &amp;ndash ; Rubin Carter , American boxer ( d. 2014 ) *1938 &amp;ndash ; Jean Garon , Canadian economist , lawyer , and politician ( d. 2014 ) * 1938 &amp;ndash ; Larry Gogan , Irish radio host *1939 &amp;ndash ; Eddie C. Campbell , American singer and guitarist *1940 &amp;ndash ; Alexandra Burslem , Chinese-English academic *1942 &amp;ndash ; Ariel Dorfman , Argentinian author , playwright , and academic * 1942 &amp;ndash ; David Friesen , American bassist * 1942 &amp;ndash ; Rin Kaiho , Chinese-Japanese go player *1943 &amp;ndash ; Andreas Baader , German terrorist , co-founded the Red Army Faction ( d. 1977 ) * 1943 &amp;ndash ; Grange Calveley , English animator and screenwriter * 1943 &amp;ndash ; Milton William Cooper , American theorist and author ( d. 2001 ) * 1943 &amp;ndash ; Wolfgang Reinhardt , German pole vaulter ( d. 2011 ) * 1943 &amp;ndash ; James Turrell , American light artist *1944 &amp;ndash ; Anton Furst , English-American production designer ( d. 1991 ) * 1944 &amp;ndash ; Masanori Murakami , Japanese baseball player and coach *1945 1945 &amp;ndash ; Jimmie Dale Gilmore , American singer-songwriter , guitarist , producer , and actor ( The Flatlanders ) * 1945 &amp;ndash ; Bob Seger , American singer-songwriter and guitarist *1946 &amp;ndash ; Susan Brown , English actress * 1946 &amp;ndash ; Frankie Librn , Puerto Rican baseball player ( d. 2013 ) *1947 &amp;ndash ; Alan Dale , New Zealand actor * 1947 &amp;ndash ; Kit Martin , English architect * 1947 &amp;ndash ; Martha Nussbaum , American philosopher and author * 1947 &amp;ndash ; Ljubomir Vraarevi , Serbian martial artist , founded Real Aikido ( d. 2013 ) *1948 &amp;ndash ; Robert Eyer , American actor ( d. 2005 ) * 1948 &amp;ndash ; Mary MacGregor , American singer *1949 &amp;ndash ; John Pawson , English architect and designer *1950 &amp;ndash ; Jeffery Deaver , American author * 1950 &amp;ndash ; Robbie McIntosh , Scottish drummer ( Average White Band and The Senate ) ( d. 1974 ) *1951 &amp;ndash ; Samuel Doe , Liberian politician , 21st President of Liberia ( d. 1990 ) *1952 &amp;ndash ; Christian Clavier , French actor and producer * 1952 &amp;ndash &amp;ndash ; Michael O'Hare , American actor ( d. 2012 ) * 1952 &amp;ndash ; Fred Newman , American actor and composer * 1952 &amp;ndash ; Gerrit Zalm , Dutch politician , Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands *1953 &amp;ndash ; Alexander Akimov , Ukrainian Chernobyl worker ( d. 1986 ) * 1953 &amp;ndash ; Tony Blair , Scottish-English politician , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom * 1953 &amp;ndash ; Michelle Courchesne , Canadian politician , Deputy Premier of Quebec * 1953 &amp;ndash ; lle Rajasalu , Estonian politician * 1953 &amp;ndash ; Graeme Souness , Scottish footballer and manager * 1953 &amp;ndash ; Lynn Whitfield , American actress *1954 &amp;ndash ; Tom Abernethy , American basketball player * 1954 &amp;ndash ; Dora Bakoyannis , Greek politician , 120th Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece *1955 &amp;ndash ; Nicholas Alexander , 7th Earl of Caledon , English politician , Lord Lieutenant of Armagh * 1955 &amp;ndash ; Tom Bergeron , American television host * 1955 &amp;ndash ; Ron Fawcett , English rock climber * 1955 &amp;ndash ; John Hutton , Baron Hutton of Furness , English politician , Secretary of actor and screenwriter * 1956 &amp;ndash ; Roland Wieser , German race walker *1958 &amp;ndash ; Lolita Flores , Spanish singer and actress * 1958 &amp;ndash ; Jan Leyers , Belgian singer-songwriter ( Soulsister ) * 1958 &amp;ndash ; Randall Stout , American architect , designed the Taubman Museum of Art ( d. 2014 ) *1959 &amp;ndash ; Andreas Busse , German runner * 1959 &amp;ndash ; Charles Hendry , English politician *1960 &amp;ndash ; Lyudmila Andonova , Bulgarian high jumper * 1960 &amp;ndash ; Roma Downey , Irish-American actress , singer , and producer * 1960 &amp;ndash ; John Flansburgh , American singer-songwriter and guitarist ( They Might Be Giants and Mono Puff ) * 1960 &amp;ndash ; Aleksei Lotman , Estonian biologist and politician * 1960 &amp;ndash ; Anne Parillaud , French actress * 1960 &amp;ndash ; Phyllis Treigle , American soprano *1961 &amp;ndash ; Aleksandr Apaychev , Ukrainian decathlete * 1961 &amp;ndash ; George Clooney , American actor , director , producer , and screenwriter * 1961 &amp;ndash ; Tom Hunter , Scottish businessman and philanthropist * 1961 &amp;ndash ; Gina Riley , Australian actress , singer , English politician *1963 &amp;ndash ; Alessandra Ferri , Italian ballerina *1964 &amp;ndash ; Dana Hill , American actress ( d. 1996 ) * 1964 &amp;ndash ; Tony Scalzo , American singer-songwriter and guitarist ( Fastball ) *1965 &amp;ndash ; Leslie Hope , Canadian actress *1968 &amp;ndash ; Worku Bikila , Ethiopian runner * 1968 &amp;ndash ; Ltitia Sadier , French singer and keyboard player ( Stereolab , Monade , and McCarthy ) *1969 &amp;ndash ; Jim Magilton , Irish footballer and manager *1970 &amp;ndash ; Roland Kun , Nauruan politician * 1970 &amp;ndash ; Kavan Smith , Canadian actor * 1970 &amp;ndash ; Tristn Ulloa , French-Spanish actor and director *1971 &amp;ndash ; Chris Shiflett , American singer-songwriter and guitarist ( Foo Fighters , Me First and the Gim me Gimmes , Jackson United , No Use for a Name , and Viva Death ) *1972 &amp;ndash ; Martin Brodeur , Canadian ice hockey player * 1972 &amp;ndash ; Naoko Takahashi , Japanese runner *1974 &amp;ndash ; Bernard Barmasai , Kenyan runner * 1974 &amp;ndash ; Daniela Brtov , Czech pole vaulter * 1974 &amp;ndash ; Faruk Namdar , German-Turkish footballer &amp;ndash ; Marc Chouinard , Canadian ice hockey player * 1977 &amp;ndash ; Mark Eaton , American ice hockey player *1978 &amp;ndash ; John Abraham , American football player * 1978 &amp;ndash ; Fredrick Federley , Swedish politician * 1978 &amp;ndash ; Aleksandr Fyodorov , Russian bodybuilder *1979 &amp;ndash ; Mark Burrier , American illustrator * 1979 &amp;ndash ; Kerry Ellis , English actress and singer * 1979 &amp;ndash ; Gerd Kanter , Estonian discus thrower *1980 &amp;ndash ; Taebin , American-South Korean rapper ( 1TYM ) * 1980 &amp;ndash ; Nicole Brunner , American actress * 1980 &amp;ndash ; Colt Cabana , American wrestler * 1980 &amp;ndash ; Dimitris Diamantidis , Greek basketball player * 1980 &amp;ndash ; Mark Ladwig , American figure skater * 1980 &amp;ndash ; Ricardo Oliveira , Brazilian footballer * 1980 &amp;ndash ; Kelly van der Veer , Dutch singer and actress *1981 &amp;ndash ; Matt Drake , English singer-songwriter and guitarist ( Evile ) * 1981 &amp;ndash ; Nick Setta , American-Canadian football player * 1981 &amp;ndash ; Edyta liwiska , Polish-American dancer *1982 &amp;ndash ; Dilshod Nazarov , Tajikistani hammer thrower * 1982 &amp;ndash Jason Witten , American football player *1983 &amp;ndash ; Dani Alves , Brazilian footballer * 1983 &amp;ndash ; Ingrid Jonach , Australian author * 1983 &amp;ndash ; Adrianne Palicki , American actress * 1983 &amp;ndash ; Gabourey Sidibe , American actress * 1983 &amp;ndash ; Trinley Thaye Dorje , Tibetan religious leader , the 17th Karmapa Lama * 1983 &amp;ndash ; Raquel Zimmermann , Brazilian model *1984 &amp;ndash ; Abu Mansoor Al-Amriki , American-Somali terrorist ( d. 2013 ) * 1984 &amp;ndash ; Anton Babchuk , Ukrainian ice hockey player * 1984 &amp;ndash ; Juan Pablo Carrizo , Argentinian footballer *1985 &amp;ndash ; Tanerau Latimer , New Zealand rugby player * 1985 &amp;ndash ; Chris Paul , American basketball player *1986 &amp;ndash ; Cindy Daniel , Canadian singer * 1986 &amp;ndash ; Goran Dragi , Slovenian basketball player * 1986 &amp;ndash ; Tyler Hynes , Canadian actor * 1986 &amp;ndash ; Roman Kreuziger , Czech cyclist * 1986 &amp;ndash ; Sasheer Zamata , American comedian *1987 &amp;ndash ; Moon Geun-young , South Korean actress * 1987 &amp;ndash ; Meek Mill , American rapper * 1987 &amp;ndash ; Kaliese Spencer , Jamaican guitarist * 1989 &amp;ndash ; Dominika Cibulkov , Slovakian tennis player * 1989 &amp;ndash ; Amra Sadikovi , Swiss tennis player *1990 &amp;ndash ; Danielle Beaubrun , Saint Lucian swimmer * 1990 &amp;ndash ; Caitlin Yankowskas , American figure skater *1991 &amp;ndash ; Valerio Frasca , Italian footballer * 1991 &amp;ndash ; Harriet Lee , English swimmer *1992 &amp;ndash ; Brendan Gallagher , Canadian ice hockey player * 1992 &amp;ndash ; Ria Popovi , English-Serbian footballer * 1992 &amp;ndash ; Zigismunds Sirmais , Latvian javelin thrower * 1992 &amp;ndash ; Takashi Usami , Japanese footballer *1993 &amp;ndash ; Alex Preston , American singer * 1993 &amp;ndash ; Naomi Scott , English actress and singer *1994 &amp;ndash ; Mateo Kovai , Austrian-Croatian footballer *1996 &amp;ndash ; Dominic Scott Kay , American actor *2002 &amp;ndash ; Emily Alyn Lind , American actress Do not add yourself or people without Wikipedia articles to this list . Do not trust this year in history websites for accurate date information . Do not link multiple occurrences of the same year , just link the first occurrence . -- # Deaths # *1471 &amp;ndash ; Edmund Beaufort 1438 ) *1475 &amp;ndash ; Dieric Bouts , Flemish painter ( b. 1415 ) *1502 &amp;ndash ; James Tyrrell , English knight ( b. 1450 ) *1596 &amp;ndash ; Giaches de Wert , Flemish-Italian composer ( b. 1535 ) *1631 &amp;ndash ; Sir Robert Cotton , 1st Baronet , of Connington , English politician , founded the Cotton library ( b. 1570 ) *1638 &amp;ndash ; Cornelius Jansen , Dutch-French bishop ( b. 1585 ) *1708 &amp;ndash ; Franois de Laval , French-Canadian bishop ( b. 1623 ) *1757 &amp;ndash ; Charles FitzRoy , 2nd Duke of Grafton , English politician , Lord Lieutenant of Ireland ( b. 1683 ) * 1757 &amp;ndash ; Kurt Christoph Graf von Schwerin , Prussian field marshal ( b. 1684 ) *1840 &amp;ndash ; Francisco de Paula Santander , Colombian general and politician , 4th President of the Republic of the New Granada ( b. 1792 ) *1859 &amp;ndash ; Alexander von Humboldt , German geographer and explorer ( b. 1769 ) *1862 &amp;ndash ; Henry David Thoreau , American author and philosopher ( b. 1817 ) *1877 &amp;ndash ; Johan Ludvig Runeberg , Swedish-Finnish Burke , Irish civil servant ( b. 1829 ) * 1882 &amp;ndash ; Lord Frederick Cavendish , English-Irish politician , Chief Secretary for Ireland ( b. 1836 ) *1902 &amp;ndash ; Bret Harte , American author ( b. 1836 ) *1910 &amp;ndash ; Edward VII of the United Kingdom ( b. 1841 ) *1913 &amp;ndash ; Alexandros Schinas , Greek assassin of George I of Greece ( b. 1870 ) *1919 &amp;ndash ; L. Frank Baum , American author ( b. 1856 ) *1939 &amp;ndash ; Konstantin Somov , Russian-French painter ( b. 1869 ) *1949 &amp;ndash ; Maurice Maeterlinck , Belgian-French poet and playwright , Nobel Prize laureate ( b. 1862 ) *1951 &amp;ndash ; lie Cartan , French mathematician ( b. 1869 ) *1952 &amp;ndash ; Maria Montessori , Italian-Dutch physician and educator ( b. 1870 ) *1959 &amp;ndash ; Ragnar Nurkse , Estonian-American economist and academic ( b. 1907 ) *1961 &amp;ndash ; Lucian Blaga , Romanian poet , playwright , and philosopher ( b. 1895 ) *1963 &amp;ndash ; Theodore von Krmn , Hungarian-American physicist ( b. 1881 ) * 1963 &amp;ndash ; Ted Weems , American 1901 ) * 1963 &amp;ndash ; Monty Woolley , American actor and director ( b. 1888 ) *1967 &amp;ndash ; Zhou Zuoren , Chinese author ( b. 1885 ) *1970 &amp;ndash ; Aleksandr Rodzyanko , Russian general ( b. 1879 ) *1972 &amp;ndash ; Deniz Gezmi , Turkish activist ( b. 1947 ) *1973 &amp;ndash ; Ernest MacMillan , Canadian conductor and composer ( b. 1893 ) *1975 &amp;ndash ; Jzsef Mindszenty , Hungarian cardinal ( b. 1892 ) *1983 &amp;ndash ; Ezra Jack Keats , American author and illustrator ( b. 1916 ) * 1983 &amp;ndash ; Kai Winding , Danish-American trombonist and composer ( b. 1922 ) *1984 &amp;ndash ; Mary Cain , American journalist and politician ( b. 1904 ) * 1984 &amp;ndash ; Bonner Pink , English politician ( b. 1912 ) *1985 &amp;ndash ; Julie Vega , Filipino actress and singer ( b. 1968 ) *1987 &amp;ndash ; William J. Casey , American politician , 13th Director of Central Intelligence ( b. 1913 ) *1989 &amp;ndash ; Earl Blaik , American football player and coach ( b. 1897 ) *1990 &amp;ndash ; Charles Farrell , American Wilfrid Hyde-White , English-American actor and singer ( b. 1903 ) *1992 &amp;ndash ; Marlene Dietrich , German-American actress and singer ( b. 1901 ) * 1992 &amp;ndash ; Gaston Reiff , Belgian runner ( b. 1921 ) * 1992 &amp;ndash ; Jilly Rizzo , American businessman and actor ( b. 1917 ) *1993 &amp;ndash ; Ann Todd , English actress and producer ( b. 1909 ) *1995 &amp;ndash ; Noel Brotherston , Irish footballer ( b. 1956 ) * 1995 &amp;ndash ; Maria Pia de Saxe-Coburgo e Bragana , Portuguese woman who claimed to be the daughter of Carlos I of Portugal ( b. 1907 ) *2000 &amp;ndash ; Gordon McClymont , Australian ecologist and educator ( b. 1920 ) *2002 &amp;ndash ; Murray Adaskin , Canadian violinist , composer , conductor , and educator ( b. 1906 ) * 2002 &amp;ndash ; Otis Blackwell , American singer-songwriter and pianist ( b. 1932 ) * 2002 &amp;ndash ; Pim Fortuyn , Dutch sociologist , academic , and politician ( b. 1948 ) *2003 &amp;ndash ; Art Houtteman , American baseball player and journalist ( b. 1927 ) *2004 &amp;ndash ; 2004 &amp;ndash ; Barney Kessel , American guitarist and composer ( The Wrecking Crew ) ( b. 1923 ) * 2004 &amp;ndash ; Virginia Capers , American actress ( b. 1925 ) *2006 &amp;ndash ; Lillian Asplund , American survivor of the Sinking of the RMS Titanic ( b. 1906 ) * 2006 &amp;ndash ; Shigeru Kayano , Japanese activist ( b. 1926 ) * 2006 &amp;ndash ; Grant McLennan , Australian singer-songwriter and guitarist ( The Go-Betweens and Jack Frost ) ( b. 1958 ) * 2006 &amp;ndash ; Lorne Saxberg , Canadian journalist ( b. 1958 ) *2007 &amp;ndash ; Enas Carneiro , Brazilian physician and politician ( b. 1938 ) * 2007 &amp;ndash ; Curtis Harrington , American actor , director , and screenwriter ( b. 1926 ) * 2007 &amp;ndash ; ore Novkovi , Croatian songwriter ( b. 1943 ) *2009 &amp;ndash ; Kevin Grubb , American race car driver ( b. 1978 ) * 2009 &amp;ndash ; Viola Wills , American singer ( b. 1939 ) *2010 &amp;ndash ; Robin Roberts , American baseball player , coach , and sportscaster ( b. 1926 ) *2012 &amp;ndash * 2012 &amp;ndash ; James R. Browning , American judge ( b. 1918 ) * 2012 &amp;ndash ; Pat Frink , American basketball player ( b. 1945 ) * 2012 &amp;ndash ; Iraj Ghaderi , Iranian actor and director ( b. 1935 ) * 2012 &amp;ndash ; James Isaac , American director , producer , and visual effects specialist ( b. 1960 ) * 2012 &amp;ndash ; Jean Laplanche , French psychoanalyst and author ( b. 1924 ) * 2012 &amp;ndash ; George Lindsey , American actor ( b. 1928 ) *2013 &amp;ndash ; Giulio Andreotti , Italian journalist and politician , 41st Prime Minister of Italy ( b. 1919 ) * 2013 &amp;ndash ; Steve Carney , English footballer ( b. 1957 ) * 2013 &amp;ndash ; Diana Keppel , Countess of Albemarle ( b. 1909 ) * 2013 &amp;ndash ; Esperanza Magaz , Cuban-Venezuelan actress ( b. 1922 ) * 2013 &amp;ndash ; Severo Aparicio Quispe , Peruvian bishop ( b. 1923 ) * 2013 &amp;ndash ; Michelangelo Spensieri , Italian-Canadian lawyer and politician ( b. 1949 ) *2014 &amp;ndash ; Wil Albeda , Dutch economist and politician , 2014 &amp;ndash ; Bill Dana , American pilot and astronaut ( b. 1930 ) * 2014 &amp;ndash ; Jimmy Ellis , American boxer ( b. 1940 ) * 2014 &amp;ndash ; Billy Harrell , American baseball player ( b. 1928 ) * 2014 &amp;ndash ; Antony Hopkins , English pianist , composer , and conductor ( b. 1921 ) * 2014 &amp;ndash ; Maria Lassnig , Austrian painter ( b. 1919 ) * 2014 &amp;ndash ; Farley Mowat , Canadian environmentalist and author ( b. 1921 ) Do NOT add people without Wikipedia articles to this list Do NOT trust this year in history websites for accurate date information Do NOT link multiple occurrences of the same year , just link the first occurrence . -- # Holidays and observances # *Christian Feast Day : **Anthony Middleton **Edward Jones ( martyr ) **Dominic Savio **Evodius of Antioch ( Roman Catholic Church ) **Gerard of Lunel **Lucius of Cyrene **Petronax of Monte Cassino **St George 's Day related observances ( Eastern Orthodox Church ) : ***Day of Bravery , also known as ' ' Gergyovden ' ' ( Bulgaria ) ***urevdan ( 's Day in the Spring ( Russian Orthodox Church ) **May 6 ( Eastern Orthodox liturgics ) *Earliest day on which Military Spouse Day can fall , while May 12 is the latest ; celebrated on Friday before Mother 's Day ( United States ) *International No Diet Day *Martyrs ' Day ( Gabon ) *Martyrs ' Day ( Lebanon and Syria ) *Teachers ' Day ( Jamaica ) *Yom Ha'atzmaut ( Israel , 2014 ) *The first day of Hdrellez ( Turkey ) 
 Nanomedicine is the medical application of nanotechnology . Nanomedicine ranges from the medical applications of nanomaterials , to nanoelectronic biosensors , and even possible future applications of molecular nanotechnology . Current problems for nanomedicine involve understanding the issues related to toxicity and environmental impact of nanoscale materials ( materials whose structure is on the scale of nanometers , i.e. billionths of a meter ) . Nanomedicine research is receiving funding from the US National Institutes of Health . Of note is the funding in 2005 of a five-year plan to set up four nanomedicine centers . In April 2006 , the journal Nature Materials estimated that 130 nanotech-based drugs and delivery systems were being developed worldwide . # Overview # The biological and medical research communities have exploited the unique properties of nanomaterials for various applications ( e.g. , contrast agents for cell imaging and therapeutics for treating cancer ) . Terms such as ' ' biomedical nanotechnology ' ' , ' ' nanobiotechnology ' ' , and ' ' nanomedicine ' ' are used to describe this hybrid field . Functionalities can be added to nanomaterials by of nanomaterials is similar to that of most biological molecules and structures ; therefore , nanomaterials can be useful for both in vivo and in vitro biomedical research and applications . Thus far , the integration of nanomaterials with biology has led to the development of diagnostic devices , contrast agents , analytical tools , physical therapy applications , and drug delivery vehicles . Nanomedicine seeks to deliver a valuable set of research tools and clinically useful devices in the near future . The National Nanotechnology Initiative expects new commercial applications in the pharmaceutical industry that may include advanced drug delivery systems , new therapies , and in vivo imaging . Neuro-electronic interfaces and other nanoelectronics-based sensors are another active goal of research . Further down the line , the speculative field of molecular nanotechnology believes that cell repair machines could revolutionize medicine and the medical field . Nanomedicine is a large industry , with nanomedicine sales reaching $6.8 billion in 2004 , and with over 200 companies and 38 products worldwide , a minimum of $3.8 billion in nanotechnology R&amp;D is being invested every year . As the nanomedicine industry significant impact on the economy . # Medical use of nanomaterials # Two forms of nanomedicine that have already been tested in mice and are awaiting human trials that will be using gold nanoshells to help diagnose and treat cancer , and using liposomes as vaccine adjuvants and as vehicles for drug transport . Similarly , drug detoxification is also another application for nanomedicine which has shown promising results in rats . A benefit of using nanoscale for medical technologies is that smaller devices are less invasive and can possibly be implanted inside the body , plus biochemical reaction times are much shorter . These devices are faster and more sensitive than typical drug delivery . Advances in Lipid nanotechnology was also instrumental in engineering medical nanodevices and novel drug delivery systems as well as in developing sensing applications . # Drug delivery # Nanotechnology has provided the possibility of delivering drugs to specific cells using nanoparticles . The overall drug consumption and side-effects may be lowered significantly by depositing the active agent in the morbid region only and in no higher dose than needed . This highly selective approach would found in dendrimers and nanoporous materials . Another example is to use block co-polymers , which form micelles for drug encapsulation . They could hold small drug molecules transporting them to the desired location . Another vision is based on small electromechanical systems ; nanoelectromechanical systems are being investigated for the active release of drugs . Some potentially important applications include cancer treatment with iron nanoparticles or gold shells . Targeted drug delivery is intended to reduce the side effects of drugs with concomitant decreases in consumption and treatment expenses . The increased efficiency of delivery results in overall societal benefit by reducing the amount of drug needed in an equipotent preparation of said therapy , and thus reduced cost to the consumer . Nanomedical approaches to drug delivery center on developing nanoscale particles or molecules to improve drug bioavailability . Bioavailability refers to the presence of drug molecules where they are needed in the body and where they will do the most good . Drug delivery focuses on maximizing bioavailability both at specific places in the body and over a period of time . This can potentially be achieved by targeting the molecules and delivering drugs with cell precision . More than $65 billion are wasted each year due to poor bioavailability . ' ' In vivo ' ' imaging is another area where tools and devices are being developed . Using nanoparticle contrast agents , images such as ultrasound and MRI have a favorable distribution and improved contrast . The new methods of nanoengineered materials that are being developed might be effective in treating illnesses and diseases such as cancer . What nanoscientists will be able to achieve in the future is beyond current imagination . This might be accomplished by self assembled biocompatible nanodevices that will detect , evaluate , treat and report to the clinical doctor automatically . Drug delivery systems , lipid- or polymer-based nanoparticles , can be designed to improve the pharmacological and therapeutic properties of drugs . The strength of drug delivery systems is their ability to alter the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of the drug . However , the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of nanomedicine is highly variable among different patients . When designed to avoid the body 's defence mechanisms , nanoparticles have beneficial properties larger particles would have been cleared from the body , cells take up these nanoparticles because of their size . Complex drug delivery mechanisms are being developed , including the ability to get drugs through cell membranes and into cell cytoplasm . Efficiency is important because many diseases depend upon processes within the cell and can only be impeded by drugs that make their way into the cell . Triggered response is one way for drug molecules to be used more efficiently . Drugs are placed in the body and only activate on encountering a particular signal . For example , a drug with poor solubility will be replaced by a drug delivery system where both hydrophilic and hydrophobic environments exist , improving the solubility . Also , a drug may cause tissue damage , but with drug delivery , regulated drug release can eliminate the problem . If a drug is cleared too quickly from the body , this could force a patient to use high doses , but with drug delivery systems clearance can be reduced by altering the pharmacokinetics of the drug . Poor biodistribution is a problem the particulates from drug delivery systems lower the volume of distribution and reduce the effect on non-target tissue . Potential nanodrugs will work by very specific and well-understood mechanisms ; one of the major impacts of nanotechnology and nanoscience will be in leading development of completely new drugs with more useful behavior and less side effects . Polymeric nano-particles are a competing technology to lipidic ( based mainly on Phospholipids ) nano-particles . There is an additional risk of toxicity associated with polymers not widely studied or understood . This toxicity could include ( but not limited to ) hepatotoxicity , nephrotoxicity etc. and can have long term impacts not easily evaluated in short term in-vivo clinical trials either in animals or humans . Since the degradation of polymers to either their monomers or other degradation products in the body can not be accurately predicted ( unclear metabolic pathway ) , this is a real risk , specially in medicines intended for long term patient use . Even if the toxicity is ignored , there is additional hepatic load of metabolism , again an area of concern for long term medication cost and predictable characterisation , so the formulation chemists prefer this . However , in the patient 's body this very stability ( slow degradation ) is a negative factor . Phospholipids on the other hand are membrane lipids ( already present in the body and surrounding each cell ) , have a GRAS ( Generally Recognised As Safe ) status from FDA and are derived from natural sources without any complex chemistry involved . They are not metabolised but rather absorbed by the body and the degradation products are themselves nutrients ( fats or micronutrients ) . It is greatly observed that nanoparticles are promising tools for the advancement of drug delivery , medical imaging , and as diagnostic sensors . However , the biodistribution of these nanoparticles is still imperfect due to the complex host 's reactions to nano- and microsized materials <sup> 14 </sup> and the difficulty in targeting specific organs in the body . Nevertheless , a lot of work is still ongoing to optimize and better understand the potential and limitations of nanoparticulate systems . For example , current research in the excretory systems of mice organs based on their size and charge . These composites are encapsulated by a dendrimer and assigned a specific charge and size . Positively-charged gold nanoparticles were found to enter the kidneys while negatively-charged gold nanoparticles remained in the liver and spleen . It is suggested that the positive surface charge of the nanoparticle decreases the rate of opsonization of nanoparticles in the liver , thus affecting the excretory pathway . Even at a relatively small size of 5 nm , though , these particles can become compartmentalized in the peripheral tissues , and will therefore accumulate in the body over time . While advancement of research proves that targeting and distribution can be augmented by nanoparticles , the dangers of nanotoxicity become an important next step in further understanding of their medical uses . Nanoparticles are also used to circumvent multidrug resistance ( MDR ) mechanisms . Mechanisms of MDR include decreased uptake of drugs , reduced intracellular drug concentration by activation of the efflux transporters , modifications in cellular pathways by altering cell cycle checkpoints , increased metabolism of drugs , induced emergency response genes to impair apoptotic pathways research studies# # *Abraxane , approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) to treat breast cancer , non-small- cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) and pancreatic cancer , is the nanoparticle albumin bound paclitaxel. *Doxil was originally approved by the FDA for the use on HIV-related Kaposi 's sarcoma . It is now being used to also treat ovarian cancer and multiple myeloma . The drug is encased in liposomes , which helps to extend the life of the drug that is being distributed . Liposomes are self-assembling , spherical , closed colloidal structures that are composed of lipid bilayers that surround an aqueous space . The liposomes also help to increase the functionality and it helps to decrease the damage that the drug does to the heart muscles specifically . *In a mice study , scientists from Rice University and University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center reported enhanced effectiveness and reduced toxicity of an existing treatment for head and neck cancer when using the nanoparticles to deliver the drug . The hydrophilic carbonic clusters functionalized with polyethylene glycol or PEG-HCC are mixed with the chemotherapeutic receptor ( EGFR ) targeted Cetuximab and injected intravenously . They found the tumors were killed more effectively with radiation and the healthy tissue suffered less toxicity than without the nanotechnology drug delivery . The standard treatment contains Cremophor EL which allows the hydrophobic paclitaxel to be delivered intravenously . Replacing the toxic Cremophor with carbon nanoparticles eliminated its side effect and improved drug targeting which in turn required a lower dose of the toxic paclitaxel. *Researchers at Case Western Reserve University reported using nanoparticle chain to deliver doxorubicin to breast cancer cells in a mice study . Three magnetic , iron-oxide nanospheres were chemically linked to one doxorubicin-loaded liposome and formed a 100 nm long nanoparticle chain . After the nanochains penetrated the tumor , radiofrequency field was generated that caused the magnetic nanoparticles to vibrate and rupture the liposome , dispersing the drug in its free form throughout the tumor . The result showed that the nano treatment was more effective in halting tumor growth than the standard treatment with doxorubicin . It is also less harmful to healthy cells since only 5% to 10% of the standard dose ( PEG ) carrying payload of antibiotics at its core could swift charge thus allowing them to target bacterial infection more precisely inside the body , a group of MIT researchers reported . The nanoparticles , containing a sub-layer of pH sensitive chains of the amino acid histidine , carry a slightly negative charge when circulating in the blood stream , can evade detection and clearing by the immune system . When they encounter an infection site the particles gain a positive charge provoked by the slightly acidic environment at the infection sites , allowing them to bind to the negatively charged bacterial cell walls and release antibiotics at locally high concentration . This nano delivery system can potentially destroy bacteria even if it has developed resistance to antibiotics because of the targeted high dose and prolonged release of the drug . Although a lot of work is still needed , the researchers believe that it points to a new direction of using nanotechnology to treat infectious disease . *Using the biomimetic strategy , researchers in the Harvard University Wyss Institute demonstrated in a mouse model that the drug coated nanoparticles regions in the blood vessels just like the platelets do . Aggregates of biodegradable nanoparticles coated with tissue plasminogen activator ( tPA ) , each about the size of a platelet , were injected intravenously . In the region of vessel narrowing , shear stresses dissociate the aggregates and release the tPA-coated nanoparticles which bind and degrade the blood clots . By prcised targeting and concentrating drug at the location of obstruction , the dose used is less than 1/50th of the normal dose . The nanotherapeutics will greatly reduce the severe side effect of bleeding , commonly found in standard treatment of thrombosis . *An early phase clinical trial using the platform of Minicell nanoparticle for drug delivery have been tested on patients with advanced and untreatable cancer . Built from the membranes of mutant bacteria , the minicells were loaded with paclitaxel and coated with cetuximab , antibodies that bind the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) which is often overexpressed in a number of cancers , as a ' homing ' device to the tumor cells . The tumor cells recognize the bacteria from which the minicells engulf it . Once inside , the payload of anti-cancer drug kills the tumor cells . Measured at 400 nanometers , the minicell is bigger than synthetic particles developed for drug delivery . The researchers indicated that this larger size gives the minicells a better profile in side-effects because the minicells will preferentially leak out of the porous blood vessels around the tumor cells and do not reach the liver , digestive system and skin . This Phase 1 clinical trial demonstrated that this treatment is well tolerated by the patients . As a platform technology , the minicell drug delivery system can be used to treat a number of different cancers with different anti-cancer drugs with the benefit of lower dose and less side-effects . *Researchers at The Methodist Hospital Research Institute in Houston have created ' LeukoLike Vectors ' or LLVs . LLVs are the drug-carrying silicon nanoparticles coated with the lipoprotein removed from the membranes of the white blood cells , leukocytes . The ' cloaked ' nanoparticles were found to behave like leukocytes , are able to evade the body 's immune system and survive much longer . The scientists expressed that LLVs are able to overcome a major hurdle in nanomedicine delivery by avoiding clearance in blood stream , crossing the biological barriers and localizing at target tissues due to its leukocyte like characters . Synthetic membranes are expected to develop in the future to replace harvest from the white blood cells due to the limited source of leukocyte. *Inhalable nanocarriers were developed using a nanostructured lipid nanocarrier-based system ( NLCS ) . The lipid nanoparticles contain the drug payload ( doxorubicin or paclitaxel ) ; two types of small interfering RNA ( siRNA , targeted the BCL-2 mRNA to suppress nonpump cellular resistance , and MRP1 mRNA to suppress pump drug resistance ) ; and the targeting molecules , an analog of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone ( LHRH ) which homes in the overexpressed receptors of the cancer cells . The disease model tested was a mouse model of human lung cancer . Results showed enhanced antitumor activity and significant reduction of exposure of healthy organs when compared to the conventional intravenous treatment . *Self-powered nanoparticles with a payload of osteoporosis drug are reported to be pulled ion gradients generated by leaked minerals ( ions ) from the bone , and deliver highly targeted drugs for healing . Using a model system of human tibia and femur , researchers from Pennsylvania State University and Boston University used nanoparticles of polylactic-coglycolic acid ( widely used in medical devices ) carrying sodium alendronate ( an osteoporosis drug ) for the ' ' in vitro ' ' experiments and found the ' nanotrucks ' successfully carry the drug to the fresh crack of the human bone . *Nanodiamond is diamond particle with a diameter of 2 to 8 nm and surface functional groups to bind various kinds of molecule . Clusters of the nanodiamonds in the range of 50-100 nm in diameter can be manufactured to trap drug inside and slowly release the payload . Experiments by researchers in Northwestern University on mouse models with chemotherapy-resistant liver and breast cancers show that the nanodiamonds with a normally lethal dose of doxorubicin significantly reduce the size of the tumors without toxic side effects expected from the drug if administered alone . The nanodiamond drug complex is found to have a much longer and , once inside the tumor , the nanoparticles are retained much longer . Additional studies using nanodiamonds include treating the triple-negative breast cancer with epirubicin and glioblastoma with doxorubicin . Increase in survival rate with reduced side effects were observed in both the mouse models . UCLA reported that contact lens embedded with nanodiamonds at the size of 5 nm in diameter and loaded with the glaucoma drug timolol maleate allow controlled and sustained release of the medicine . The nanodiamonds were combined with the polymer chitosan which is cleaved when the lens make contact with the lysozyme in tears . The drug releases slowly in the eyes when the nanodiamond structure breaks down . *In regenerative medicine research , silica based nanoparticles are used to deliver molecules to transplanted cells derived from stem cells . Using a mouse model , scientists delivered two synthetic versions of neurotrophic growth factors locally using mesoporous nanoparticles to motor neurons derived from transplanted embryonic stem cells and reported improved long term survival and functional differentiation of the transplant ' ' in vivo ' ' . *Nanoparticle with a liposomal core and a gel to shrink breast cancer tumor in a mouse model . Researchers in the North Carolina State University designed this nanoparticle , called Gelipo , to deliver both drugs simultaneously and maximize the efficiency of both . The cross-linked hyaluronic acid ( HA ) shell holds and protects the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand ( TRAIL ) while the core carries liposomes filled with doxorubicin embedded with peptide . HA preferentially concentrates in hyaluronidase ( HAase ) rich tumor environment and interacts with receptors on the cancer cell membranes . When the HAase degrades the gel shell of Gelipo , the TRAIL protein is released onto the cell membrane and triggers apoptosis ( cell death ) . The core liposomes are internalized by the tumor cells into endosomes , the cellular transport system . The peptide breaks down the endosome and releases doxorubicin intracellularly , maximizes the efficacy while minimizes the toxic side effects . # Protein and peptide delivery # Protein and peptides exert multiple biological actions in the human body and they have been identified as showing great promise for treatment of various diseases and disorders . These macromolecules are using nanomaterials like nanoparticles and Dendrimers is an emerging field called nanobiopharmaceutics , and these products are called nanobiopharmaceuticals. # #Applications and reported research studies# # *Nanoparticles delivering the myelin antigens were found to induce immune tolerance in a mouse model with relapsing multiple sclerosis . Biodegradable polystyrene microparticles coated with the myelin sheath peptides reset the mouse 's immune system and prevent the disease from recurring or reduce the symptoms by halting the attack of the immune system to the protective myelin sheath coating the nerve fibers of the central nervous system . Team of researchers in Northwestern University indicated that this treatment method can potentially be used in other autoimmune diseases . *Researchers at UCLA developed a nanoparticle system with water-soluble shell encapsulated a protein derived from bird anemia virus , apoptin . Apoptin selectively sends self-destruct signal to tumor cells and trigger the programmed cell death ( apoptosis ) as it builds up in the nucleus , while leaving healthy cells unharmed . In the mouse model of human breast cancer , the treatment was found to significantly reduce the tumors growth . This new form of treatment harming healthy cells , a common pitfall of chemotherapy , and no probability of genetic mutation that usually accompanies gene therapy . *A nano-network of nanoparticles with a solid core of insulin , modified dextran and glucose oxidase was demonstrated to be able to regulate and maintain normal blood sugar level in a mouse model with Type 1 diabetes for up to 10 days . The nanoparticle is coated with either the positively charged chitosan ( from shrimp shells ) or negatively charged alginate ( from seaweed ) . The opposite charges hold the nanoparticles together as a nano-network even after they are injected subcutaneously . The porous particles allow blood to make contact with the nanoparticle cores . When there is high blood sugar level , glucose oxidase is activated and breaks down the dextran into gluconic acid . The disintegration of the cores releases the insulin which controls the blood sugar level to the normal range . # Cancer # The small size of nanoparticles endows them with properties that can be very useful in oncology , particularly in imaging . Quantum dots ( nanoparticles with quantum confinement properties in conjunction with MRI ( magnetic resonance imaging ) , can produce exceptional images of tumor sites . These nanoparticles are much brighter than organic dyes and only need one light source for excitation . This means that the use of fluorescent quantum dots could produce a higher contrast image and at a lower cost than today 's organic dyes used as contrast media . The downside , however , is that quantum dots are usually made of quite toxic elements . Another nanoproperty , high surface area to volume ratio , allows many functional groups to be attached to a nanoparticle , which can seek out and bind to certain tumor cells . Additionally , the small size of nanoparticles ( 10 to 100 nanometers ) , allows them to preferentially accumulate at tumor sites ( because tumors lack an effective lymphatic drainage system ) . Research into multifunctional nanoparticles that would detect , image , and then proceed to treat a tumor is under way . A promising new cancer treatment that may one day replace radiation and chemotherapy is edging closer to human trials . Kanzius RF therapy inside the body with radio waves that heat only the nanoparticles and the adjacent ( cancerous ) cells . Sensor test chips containing thousands of nanowires , able to detect proteins and other biomarkers left behind by cancer cells , could enable the detection and diagnosis of cancer in the early stages from a few drops of a patient 's blood . The basic point to use drug delivery is based upon three facts : a ) efficient encapsulation of the drugs , b ) successful delivery of said drugs to the targeted region of the body , and c ) successful release of that drug there . Researchers at Rice University under Prof. Jennifer West , have demonstrated the use of 120 nm diameter nanoshells coated with gold to kill cancer tumors in mice . The nanoshells can be targeted to bond to cancerous cells by conjugating antibodies or peptides to the nanoshell surface . By irradiating the area of the tumor with an infrared laser , which passes through flesh without heating it , the gold is heated sufficiently to cause death to the cancer cells . Limitations to , and lack of solubility . Nanoparticles have the potential to overcome these problems . Nanoparticles of cadmium selenide ( quantum dots ) glow when exposed to ultraviolet light . When injected , they seep into cancer tumors . The surgeon can see the glowing tumor , and use it as a guide for more accurate tumor removal . In photodynamic therapy , a particle is placed within the body and is illuminated with light from the outside . The light gets absorbed by the particle and if the particle is metal , energy from the light will heat the particle and surrounding tissue . Light may also be used to produce high energy oxygen molecules which will chemically react with and destroy most organic molecules that are next to them ( like tumors ) . This therapy is appealing for many reasons . It does not leave a toxic trail of reactive molecules throughout the body ( chemotherapy ) because it is directed where only the light is shined and the particles exist . Photodynamic therapy has potential for a noninvasive procedure for dealing with diseases , growth and tumors numerous therapeutic functions into a single platform , by targeting specific tumor cells , tissues and organs . Actually , Conde et al . reported the evaluation of the inflammatory response and therapeutic siRNA silencing via RGD-nanoparticles in a lung cancer mouse model . This study reported the use of siRNA/RGD gold nanoparticles capable of targeting tumor cells in two lung cancer xenograft mouse models , resulting in successful and significant ' ' c-Myc ' ' oncogene downregulation followed by tumor growth inhibition and prolonged survival of the animals . This delivery system can achieve translocation of siRNA duplexes directly into the tumour cell cytoplasm and accomplish successful silencing of an oncogene expression . Actually , RGD/siRNA-AuNPs can target preferentially and be taken up by tumor cells via integrin v3-receptor-mediated endocytosis with no cytotoxicity , showing that can accumulate in tumor tissues overexpressing v3 integrins and selectively delivered ' ' c-Myc ' ' siRNA to suppress tumor growth and angiogenesis. # Surgery # At Rice University , a flesh welder is used to fuse two pieces of chicken meat into a single piece . The two pieces of chicken are placed dribbled along the seam . An infrared laser is traced along the seam , causing the two sides to weld together . This could solve the difficulties and blood leaks caused when the surgeon tries to restitch the arteries that have been cut during a kidney or heart transplant . The flesh welder could weld the artery perfectly . # Visualization # Tracking movement can help determine how well drugs are being distributed or how substances are metabolized . It is difficult to track a small group of cells throughout the body , so scientists used to dye the cells . These dyes needed to be excited by light of a certain wavelength in order for them to light up . While different color dyes absorb different frequencies of light , there was a need for as many light sources as cells . A way around this problem is with luminescent tags . These tags are quantum dots attached to proteins that penetrate cell membranes . The dots can be random in size , can be made of bio-inert material , and they demonstrate the nanoscale property that color is size-dependent the frequency of light used to make a group of quantum dots fluoresce is an even multiple of the frequency required to make another group incandesce . Then both groups can be lit with a single light source . They have also found a way to insert nanoparticles into the affected parts of the body so that those parts of the body will glow showing the tumor growth or shrinkage or also organ trouble . # Tissue engineering # Nanotechnology may be able to help reproduce or repair damaged tissue . Tissue engineering makes use of artificially stimulated cell proliferation by using suitable nanomaterial-based scaffolds and growth factors . For example , bones could be regrown on carbon nanotube scaffolds . Tissue engineering might replace today 's conventional treatments like organ transplants or artificial implants . Advanced forms of tissue engineering may lead to life extension . Artificial bone composites are also being manufactured from nanocrystalline calcium phosphates. # Antimicrobial effects # Nanoparticles can be used in combination therapy for decreasing antibiotic resistance or for their antimicrobial properties . It has been shown that Zinc Oxide nanoparticles can decrease the antibiotic in Vitro . Nanoparticles can interfere with the different proteins which are interacting in the antibiotic resistance or pharmacologic mechanisms of drugs . Another example is Silver which has been used for the treatment of burns and chronic wounds . Antibacterial and antifungal properties of nanoparticles have widened their applications in medicine and dentistry. # Immune response # Buckyballs have been investigated for the ability to interrupt the allergy/immune response by preventing mast cells ( which cause allergic response ) from releasing histamine into the blood and tissues , by binding to free radicals dramatically better than any anti-oxidant currently available , such as vitamin E . In February 2013 , University of Pennsylvania researchers developed a way to prevent nano particles from triggering an immune system response ; which could aid the delivery of medicinal nanoparticles some time in future . This is done by using the protein CD47 , found on most mammalian cell membranes which binds to the SIRPa in macrophages ; preventing an immune response from being triggered . # Arthroscope # Nanotechnology is helping to advance the use of arthroscopes , which are pencil-sized devices that can do the surgeries with smaller incisions . The smaller the incisions the faster the healing time which is better for the patients . It is also helping to find a way to make an arthroscope smaller than a strand of hair . # Diagnostic and medical devices # Nanotechnology-on-a-chip is one more dimension of lab-on-a-chip technology . Magnetic nanoparticles , bound to a suitable antibody , are used to label specific molecules , structures or microorganisms . Gold nanoparticles tagged with short segments of DNA can be used for detection of genetic sequence in a sample . Multicolor optical coding for biological assays has been achieved by embedding different-sized quantum dots into polymeric microbeads . Nanopore technology for analysis of nucleic acids converts strings of nucleotides directly into electronic signatures . *C-dots ( Cornell dots ) are the smallest silica-based nanoparticles with the size **62628;7509;10 scriptstyle x </math> is given and the cost function to be minimized , that can be any function of the data <math> scriptstyle x </math> and the network 's output , <math> scriptstyle f </math> . The cost function is dependent on the task ( ' a priori ' ' assumptions ( the implicit properties of our model , its parameters and the observed variables ) . As a trivial example , consider the model <math> scriptstyle f(x) = a </math> where <math> scriptstyle a </math> is a constant and the cost <math> scriptstyle C=E ( x - f(x)2 </math> . Minimizing this cost will give us a value of <math> scriptstyle a </math> that is equal to the mean of the data . The cost function can be much more complicated . Its form depends on the application : for example , in compression it could be related to the mutual information between <math> scriptstyle x </math> and <math> scriptstyle f(x) </math> , whereas in statistical modeling , it could be related to the posterior probability of the model given the data . ( Note that in both of those examples those quantities would be maximized rather than minimized ) . Tasks that fall within the paradigm of unsupervised learning are in general estimation problems ; the applications include clustering , the estimation of statistical distributions , compression and filtering . # #Reinforcement learning# # usually not given , but generated by an agent 's interactions with the environment . At each point in time <math> scriptstyle t </math> , the agent performs an action <math> scriptstyle yt </math> and the environment generates an observation <math> scriptstyle xt </math> and an instantaneous cost <math> scriptstyle ct </math> , according to some ( usually unknown ) dynamics . The aim is to discover a ' ' policy ' ' for selecting actions that minimizes some measure of a long-term cost ; i.e. , the expected cumulative cost . The environment 's dynamics and the long-term cost for each policy are usually unknown , but can be estimated . More formally the environment is modelled as a Markov decision process ( MDP ) with states <math> scriptstyle s1 , ... , snin S </math> and actions <math> scriptstyle a1 , ... , am in A </math> with the following probability distributions : the instantaneous cost distribution <math> scriptstyle P(ctst) </math> , the observation distribution <math> scriptstyle P(xtst) </math> and the transition <math> scriptstyle P ( st+1st , at ) </math> , while a policy is defined as conditional the two then define a Markov chain ( MC ) . The aim is to discover the policy that minimizes the cost ; i.e. , the MC for which the cost is minimal . ANNs are frequently used in reinforcement learning as part of the overall algorithm . Dynamic programming has been coupled with ANNs ( Neuro dynamic programming ) by Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis and applied to multi-dimensional nonlinear problems such as those involved in vehicle routing , natural resources management or medicine because of the ability of ANNs to mitigate losses of accuracy even when reducing the discretization grid density for numerically approximating the solution of the original control problems . Tasks that fall within the paradigm of reinforcement learning are control problems , games and other sequential decision making tasks . # Learning algorithms # Training a neural network model essentially means selecting one model from the set of allowed models ( or , in a Bayesian framework , determining a distribution over the set of allowed models ) that minimizes the cost criterion . There are numerous algorithms available for training neural network models ; most of them and statistical estimation . Most of the algorithms used in training artificial neural networks employ some form of gradient descent . This is done by simply taking the derivative of the cost function with respect to the network parameters and then changing those parameters in a gradient-related direction . Evolutionary methods , These networks have also been used to diagnose prostate cancer . The diagnoses can be used to make specific models taken from a large group of patients compared to information of one given patient . The models do not depend on assumptions about correlations of different variables . Colorectal cancer has also been predicted using the neural networks . Neural networks could predict the outcome for a patient with colorectal cancer with more accuracy than the current clinical methods . After training , the networks could predict multiple patient outcomes from unrelated institutions . # Neural networks and neuroscience # Theoretical and computational neuroscience is the field concerned with the theoretical analysis and the computational modeling of biological neural systems . Since neural systems are intimately related to cognitive processes and behavior , the field is closely related to is to create models of biological neural systems in order to understand how biological systems work . To gain this understanding , neuroscientists strive to make a link between observed biological processes ( data ) , biologically plausible mechanisms for neural processing and learning ( biological neural network models ) and theory ( statistical learning theory and information theory ) . # #Types of models# # Many models are used in the field , defined at different levels of abstraction and modeling different aspects of neural systems . They range from models of the short-term behavior of individual neurons , models of how the dynamics of neural circuitry arise from interactions between individual neurons and finally to models of how behavior can arise from abstract neural modules that represent complete subsystems . These include models of the long-term , and short-term plasticity , of neural systems and their relations to learning and memory from the individual neuron to the system level . # Neural network software # Neural network software is used to simulate , research , develop and apply artificial neural networks , biological neural networks and , in some Types of artificial neural networks # Artificial neural network types vary from those with only one or two layers of single direction logic , to complicated multiinput many directional feedback loops and layers . On the whole , these systems use algorithms in their programming to determine control and organization of their functions . Most systems use weights to change the parameters of the throughput and the varying connections to the neurons . Artificial neural networks can be autonomous and learn by input from outside teachers or even self-teaching from written-in rules . # Theoretical properties # # Computational power # The multi-layer perceptron ( MLP ) is a universal function approximator , as proven by the Cybenko theorem . However , the proof is not constructive regarding the number of neurons required or the settings of the weights . Work by Hava Siegelmann and Eduardo D. Sontag has provided a proof that a specific recurrent architecture with rational valued weights ( as opposed to full precision real number-valued weights ) has the full power of a Universal Turing Machine to detecting credit card fraud . Technology writer Roger Bridgman commented networks , for instance , are in the dock not only because they have been hyped to high heaven , ( what has n't ? ) but also because you could create a successful net without understanding how it worked : the bunch of numbers that captures its behaviour would in all probability be an opaque , unreadable table ... valueless as a scientific resource . In spite of his emphatic declaration that science is not technology , Dewdney seems here to pillory neural nets as bad science when most of those devising them are just trying to be good engineers . An unreadable table that a useful machine could read would still be well worth having . # In response to this kind of criticism , one should note that although it is true that analyzing what has been learned by an artificial neural network is difficult , it is much easier to do so than to analyze what has been learned by a biological neural network . Furthermore , researchers involved in exploring learning algorithms for neural networks are gradually uncovering generic principles which allow a learning machine to 2007 ) wrote an article regarding local vs non-local learning , as well as shallow vs deep architecture . Some other criticisms came from believers of hybrid models ( combining neural networks and symbolic approaches ) . They advocate the intermix of these two approaches and believe that hybrid models can better capture the mechanisms of the human mind ( Sun and Bookman , 1990 ) . **22;70143;gallery **25;70167;TOOLONG single-layer feedforward artificial neural network . Arrows originating from <math> scriptstyle x2 </math> are omitted for clarity . There are p inputs to this network and q outputs . In this system , the value of the qth output , <math> scriptstyle yq </math> would be calculated as <math> scriptstyle yq = sum(xi*wiq) </math> Image:Twolayerann.svgA two-layer feedforward artificial neural network . **33;70194;TOOLONG **30;70229;TOOLONG </gallery> 
 Obelix ( Oblix in French ) is a cartoon character from the French comic book series Asterix . He works as a menhir sculptor and deliveryman , and is Asterix 's best friend . Obelix is noted for his fatness , the menhirs he carries around on his back and his superhuman strength . He is the only Gaul in Asterix 's village who is permanently superhumanly strong since he fell into a cauldron of magic potion when he was a baby . Because of Obelix 's already enormous strength , he is not allowed to drink the magic potion ever again , a ban he regards as being tremendously unfair . Other characteristics are his simplemindedness , his love and care for his dog Dogmatix , his anger when someone refers to him as being ' ' fat ' ' , his enthusiasm for hunting and eating wild boars and beating up Romans . His catchphrase is : ' ' Ils sont fous ces romains ' ' , which translates into They are crazy , those Romans ! , although he considers nearly every other nationality to actor Grard Depardieu in every Asterix live-action movie . # Fatness ( Well-covered ) inspection # He is a large man who does not see himself as fat , preferring to call himself ' ' well covered ' ' or having a chest that has slipped a bit . From ' ' Asterix and the Banquet ' ' onwardspreviously he had simply expressed ignorance of being fat , such as when he merely commented that he wished he had known he was too fat to pose as a lion in ' ' Asterix the Gladiator ' ' Obelix is so in denial over this matter that he usually does not even notice when other people refer to him as that fat one , and often shows total confusion over which fat person people are referring to . When he does understand the allusions are made on his behalf he flies into a rage and starts beating up the person who said it . Sometimes , when he is in a bad mood , just hearing the word fat even if it is not in reference to himcan quickly enrage him . , is one of the main causes of conflicts between Asterix and Obelix which leads to more developing conflicts in which they must work together , once escalating to the point that Obelix actually gave Asterix amnesia when he hit him too hard during an argument ( ' ' Asterix and the Actress ' ' ) . Although they usually simply insult each other verbally they inevitably make up swiftly . Sometimes , Obelix can be so paranoic over the allusion of the word ' ' Fat ' ' that he can even break the fourth wall with the mere mention of this . Visibly in Asterix and the Black Gold , when the narrator points out that their ( Asterix and Obelix 's ) vessel was pulled like a ' ' Big and fat fish ' ' , Obelix became clearly offended and yelled ' ' WHO IS FAT ! ? ' ' . # Character # Obelix is Asterix 's closest friend ( they even have the same birthday - although this is inconsistent with the comic ' ' Obelix and Co. ' ' , where only Obelix 's menhir delivery man . His passions in life are hanging around with Asterix , hunting and eating wild boar , making and carrying his menhirs , and beating up Roman legionnaries ( and occasionally collecting their helmets ) . Obelix has a little dog named Dogmatix ( Fr . ' ' Idfix ' ' ) , whom he adores . His parents live now in Condate ( as seen in ' ' Asterix and the Actress ' ' ) and his distant cousin Metallurgix , a golden sickle maker , lives in Lutetia ( as seen in ' ' Asterix and the Golden Sickle ' ' ) . Obelix 's favourite food is roast wild boar which he usually hunts with Asterix , but he has a voracious appetite , and will try eating nearly anything with few exceptions ; in ' ' Asterix and Obelix All at Sea ' ' and ' ' Asterix in Britain ' ' he seems to not like boiled boar . In fact , he eats nuts and oysters in the shell , and is completely oblivious to drugs , spicy food and poison , . However , when he consumes alcohol , he gets very drunk very quickly , as seen for example in ' ' Asterix in Britain ' ' where he enjoys sampling different barrels of wine trying to find a barrel containing magic potion , or in ' ' Asterix and the Laurel Wreath ' ' , where both he and chief Vitalstatistix get drunk during a banquet , much to shame of the latter 's wife Impedimenta . Although he has his own house , Obelix is occasionally shown staying overnight at Asterix 's . Obelix owns the quarry where he chisels the menhirs himself . It is never directly stated what the menhirs are used for , though it is hinted that they are just oversized knick-knacks ; however they are probably a running-gag regarding the origins of the mystery surrounding Menhirs in ancient Europe , with the joke being that Obelix delivered them . Obelix usually trades the stones away for whatever he needs , resulting in the village having a literal field of menhirs . Obelix is kind-hearted , but socially inept possibly because his strength means that . He is still not completely aware of his own strength and almost invariably breaks any door he ' ' gently ' ' knocks on . He is frequently used as a ' ' human battering ram ' ' for opening locked doors or breaking through walls . Similarly , he is unaware that others do not share his superhuman strength , and shows great surprise when others are crushed by what he calls ' ' a little menhir ' ' , or when Asterix attempts to explain to him that a small dog like Dogmatix can not lift a menhir . He also has little interest in subjects of formal education or intellectual pursuits , since sheer strength usually solves his problems ; he generally leaves any decisions to Asterix . However , Obelix is not completely stupid . In ' ' Asterix and the Normans ' ' he deduces from various clues that Cacofonix the bard has gone to Lutetia to pursue a career in popular music : this unusual display of intelligence on Obelix 's part surprises Getafix . He also surprises Asterix in ' ' Asterix and definition of wild boar in conversation ( including the Latin taxonomical classification ) . He can also be quite dangerous when angered . While cheerfully violent and enjoying a good fight , Obelix is far from brutal or sadistic : he tends to view fighting as a game and is generally friendly and polite ( to the point of inappropriate courtesy ) towards his opponents . He extends this benevolence even towards the Romans , whom he rarely seems to view as oppressors but more as less-willing participants in his rough-housing . His other favored pastimes are dancing ( which he apparently is very good at ) , and occasionally drinking goat 's milk to excess ( as he rarely imbibes in alcohol ) . Like Asterix , Obelix is a bachelor , but he is easily smitten by a pretty face . He harbours a hopeless crush on Panacea , the daughter of Soporifix ( one of the other villagers ) , and occasionally other young women , most notably Mrs. Geriatrix ( which enrages her husband ) . However , one may think that he will eventually find a the Class Act ' ' , he is shown to be the founder of a long dynasty of French warriors that lasted well into the 20th century . Obelix 's trademark phrase is These Romans are crazy ( Ils sont fous ces romains : in the Italian language # Strength # Unlike the other villagers , Obelix has no need to drink Getafix the druid 's magic potion that gives superhuman strength , because he fell into the cauldron as a baby and its effect on him became permanent . The story of that incident is told in ' ' How Obelix Fell into the Magic Potion When he was a Little Boy . ' ' Since this effect was not intended or expected , Getafix refuses to allow him even one more drop except under the direst circumstances ( either out of fear for his life , or fear for the lives of ' ' others ' ' should the inattentive and uncoordinated strongman become any stronger ) , which annoys Obelix greatly . ( In ' ' Asterix and Obelix All at Sea ' ' , it is revealed to stone ; exactly how much is not known , but a whole cauldron will certainly do the trick . This appears to only work on grown people as Obelix did not turn to stone as a baby , or may simply occur after drinking an excessive amount while still under the effects of a previous dose ) . However , in ' ' Asterix and Cleopatra , ' ' Getafix gives him a few drops to open a door in the Great Pyramid 's Labyrinth but he comments that he does not see much difference between before and after the potion though this is presumably because Obelix is used to accomplishing any physical task with ease . Although it has been clearly stated by both Getafix ( in ' ' Asterix the Gaul ' ' ) and Asterix ( in ' ' Asterix and the Laurel Wreath ' ' ) that the magic potion does NOT grant invulnerability ( but Getafix has a potion for that but it is only mentioned in Asterix the Gaul ) as well as superhuman strength , meaning that they ' ' could ' ' raw strength generally prevents the Romans getting the chance to do so , the same does not seem to be true of Obelix ; he does not even notice when attackers attempt to knock him unconscious with blows to the head , when Roman spearheads are stuck in his bottom in ' ' Asterix in Corsica ' ' or when anyone else attempts to harm him in any way . This may imply that Obelix , either by stupidity or ignorance , simply does not notice or react to the pain that should be inflicted , or that the potion has enhanced his overall strength , since it has been shown to increase the drinker 's endurance allowing them to run faster , to such a point where his muscles allow him to effortlessly absorb the attacks in question . Most of the occasions where Obelix demonstrates invulnerability include him being attacked physically rather than with sharp objects , as in Asterix and the Magic Carpet , when an arrow accidentally hits his bottom and he yells in agony , and thus showing that Obelix is n't above physical pain ) it comes to the relationship between the Gauls and the Romans . As far as he is concerned the more Romans he can beat up the better and nobody should deny him this , not even the selfish Roman victims themselves : *In ' ' Asterix in Britain ' ' , he dismisses the claim that the Romans have invaded Britain ; he believes that the Britons dragged the Romans over there in order to have all the fun for themselves . During a rugby match , Obelix is bored until he sees how violent the game can get , and is overjoyed , recommending that they play rugby in Gaul . *In ' ' Asterix in Corsica ' ' , it is revealed that the villagers attack the Romans at least once a year in order to celebrate the Gaulish victory at Gergovia . When the Romans leave their camps in order to avoid the attacks , Obelix sees this behaviour as crazy and detrimental to their friendly relationship . *In ' ' Asterix and Obelix All at Sea ' ' , he has a dream ( or nightmare as of Gaul . He 's horrified at the idea of such a dream coming true . He also declares that the idea of peace with the Romans is offensive to the memory of Vercingetorix . Far more likely is the fact that peace will mean that he will not be able to bash the Romans anymore , a prospect he dreads . He then comments on the good sense of the Romans in attacking the village ( although they were actually merely planning a parade to welcome an admiral ) . *The Roman civil war between Caesar and Pompey features in both ' ' Asterix the Legionary ' ' and ' ' Asterix and the Actress ' ' . When he witnesses a battle between Roman troops , Obelix murmurs What a waste ! . But this is not so much on the wasted lives as the fact that it means that he has fewer Romans to bash himself . # Portrayal # Grard Depardieu portrays Obelix in all four live-action French films based on various comics . The late Jacques Morel and Jacques Frantz voiced him in 1967-1968 and 2006 French versions of cartoons . Bernard Bresslaw , Howard Lew Lewis , Brad Garrett and Rosey Grier voiced him in English dubs of cartoons . # Name # Obelix 's name is a pun on the French word ' ' oblisque ' ' ( obelisk ) , suggested by rotund physique and his habit of casually carrying heavy stone monuments ( Menhir ) around with him . In fact obelisk is also ( in both French and English ) a variant of the word obelus ( ' ' oble ' ' ) , a typographical mark ( ) often found in a companion role to that of the asterisk , after which his friend Asterix is named . 
 MedlinePlus = 001553 Psychosis ( from the Greek ' ' psyche ' ' , mind/soul , and - ' ' -osis ' ' , abnormal condition or derangement ) refers to an abnormal condition of the mind , and is a generic psychiatric term for a mental state often described as involving a loss of contact with reality . People suffering from psychosis are described as ' ' psychotic . ' ' Psychosis ( as a sign of a psychiatric disorder ) is a diagnosis of exclusion . That is , a new-onset episode of psychosis is not considered a symptom of a psychiatric disorder until other relevant and known causes of psychosis are properly excluded . Medical and biological laboratory tests should exclude central nervous system diseases and injuries , diseases and injuries of other organs , psychoactive substances , toxins , and prescribed medications as causes of symptoms of psychosis before any psychiatric illness can be diagnosed . In medical training , psychosis as a sign of illness is often compared to fever since both can have multiple causes that are not readily apparent . The relatively normal aberrant experiences through to the complex and catatonic expressions of schizophrenia and bipolar type 1 disorder . In properly diagnosed psychiatric disorders ( where other causes have been excluded by extensive medical and biological laboratory tests ) , psychosis is a descriptive term for the hallucinations , delusions , sometimes violence , and impaired insight that may occur . Psychosis is generally given to noticeable deficits in normal behavior ( negative signs ) and more commonly to diverse types of hallucinations or delusional beliefs ( e.g. grandiosity , delusions of persecution ) . An excess in dopaminergic signalling is hypothesized to be linked to the Symptom#Positive and negative symptoms Many antipsychotic drugs accordingly target the dopamine system ; however , meta-analyses of placebo-controlled trials of these drugs show either no significant difference in effects between drug and placebo , or a moderate effect size , suggesting that the pathophysiology of psychosis is much more complex than an overactive dopamine system . People experiencing psychosis may exhibit some personality changes and thought disorder . Depending on its severity , this may be accompanied by unusual or bizarre behavior , as out daily life activities . # Signs and symptoms # People with psychosis may have one or more of the following : hallucinations , delusions , catatonia , or a thought disorder , as described below . Impairments in social cognition also occur . # Hallucinations # A hallucination is defined as sensory perception in the absence of external stimuli . Hallucinations are different from illusions , or perceptual distortions , which are the misperception of external stimuli . Hallucinations may occur in any of the five senses and take on almost any form , which may include simple sensations ( such as lights , colors , tastes , and smells ) to experiences such as seeing and interacting with fully formed animals and people , hearing voices , and having complex tactile sensations . Auditory hallucinations , particularly experiences of hearing voices , are the most common and often prominent feature of psychosis . Hallucinated voices may talk about , or to , the person , and may involve several speakers with distinct personalities . Auditory hallucinations tend to be particularly distressing when they are derogatory , commanding or preoccupying always be a negative one . One research study has shown that the majority of people who hear voices are not in need of psychiatric help . The Hearing Voices Movement has subsequently been created to support voice hearers , regardless of whether they are considered to have a mental illness or not . # Delusions # Psychosis may involve delusional beliefs , some of which are paranoid in nature . Put simply , delusions are false beliefs that a person holds on to , without adequate evidence . It can be difficult to change the belief , even with evidence to the contrary . Common themes of delusions are persecutory ( person believes that others are out to harm him/her ) , grandiose ( person believing that he or she has special powers or skills ) , etc . Depressed persons might have delusions consistent with their low mood ( e.g. , delusions that they have sinned , or have contracted serious illness , etc ) . Karl Jaspers has classified psychotic delusions into ' ' primary ' ' and ' ' secondary ' ' types . Primary delusions are of normal mental processes , whereas secondary delusions are typically understood as being influenced by the person 's background or current situation ( e.g. , ethnicity ; also religious , superstitious , or political beliefs ) . # Catatonia # Catatonia describes a profoundly agitated state in which the experience of reality is generally considered impaired . There are two primary manifestations of catatonic behavior . The classic presentation is a person who does not move or interact with the world in any way while awake . This type of catatonia presents with waxy flexibility . Waxy flexibility is when someone physically moves part of a catatonic person 's body and the person stays in the position even if it is bizarre and otherwise nonfunctional ( such as moving a person 's arm straight up in the air and the arm staying there ) . The other type of catatonia is more of an outward presentation of the profoundly agitated state described above . It involves excessive and purposeless motor behavior , as well as extreme mental preoccupation that prevents an intact experience of reality . An example is someone walking with a level of mental preoccupation ( meaning not focused on anything relevant to the situation ) that was not typical of the person prior to the symptom onset . In both types of catatonia there is generally no reaction to anything that happens outside of them . It is important to distinguish catatonic agitation from severe bipolar mania , although someone could have both . # Thought disorders # Thought disorder describes an underlying disturbance to conscious thought and is classified largely by its effects on speech and writing . Affected persons show loosening of associations , that is , a disconnection and disorganization of the semantic content of speech and writing . In the severe form speech becomes incomprehensible and it is known as word salad . # Psychiatric disorder # From a diagnostic standpoint , organic disorders were those believed caused by physical illness affecting the brain ( that is , psychiatric disorders secondary to other conditions ) , while functional disorders were considered disorders of the functioning of the mind in the absence of physical disorders ( that is , primary psychological or psychiatric disorders ) . disorders arise from physical processes ; in this view , the distinction between brain and mind , and therefore between organic and functional disease , is an artificial one . Subtle physical abnormalities have been found in illnesses traditionally considered functional , such as schizophrenia . The DSM-IV-TR avoids the functional/organic distinction , and instead lists traditional psychotic illnesses , psychosis due to general medical conditions , and substance-induced psychosis . Primary psychiatric causes of psychosis include the following : * schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder * affective ( mood ) disorders , including severe depression , and severe depression or mania in bipolar disorder ( manic depression ) . People experiencing a psychotic episode in the context of depression may experience persecutory or self-blaming delusions or hallucinations , while people experiencing a psychotic episode in the context of mania may form grandiose delusions . * schizoaffective disorder , involving symptoms of both schizophrenia and mood disorders * brief psychotic disorder , or acute/transient psychotic disorder * delusional disorder ( persistent delusional disorder ) * chronic hallucinatory psychosis Psychotic symptoms may also be seen in * schizotypal disorder * certain personality disorders schizoid personality disorder , and borderline personality disorder ) * major depressive disorder in its severe form although it is possible and more likely to have severe depression without psychosis * bipolar disorder in severe mania and/or severe depression although it is possible to have severe mania and/or severe depression without psychosis as well , in fact that is more commonly the case * post-traumatic stress disorder * induced delusional disorder * Sometimes in obsessive-compulsive disorder * Dissociative disorders , due to many overlapping symptoms , careful differential diagnosis includes especially dissociative identity disorder . Stress is known to contribute to and trigger psychotic states . A history of psychologically traumatic events , and the recent experience of a stressful event , can both contribute to the development of psychosis . Short-lived psychosis triggered by stress is known as brief reactive psychosis , and patients may spontaneously recover normal functioning within two weeks . In some rare cases , individuals may remain in a state of full-blown psychosis for many years , or perhaps have attenuated psychotic symptoms ( such as low intensity hallucinations ) present at most times . # without any psychiatric disease . Causes or triggers include * Falling asleep and waking : hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations , which are entirely normal * Bereavement , in which hallucinations of a deceased loved one are common * Severe sleep deprivation * Sensory deprivation and sensory impairment * caffeine intoxication * extremely stressful event # Subtypes # Subtypes of psychosis include : * Menstrual psychosis , including circa-mensual ( approximately monthly ) periodicity , in rhythm with the menstrual cycle . * Postpartum psychosis , occurring recently after childbirth * Monothematic delusions * Myxedematous psychosis * Occupational psychosis * Stimulant psychosis * Tardive psychosis * Shared psychosis * Cycloid psychosis # #Cycloid psychosis# # Cycloid psychosis is psychosis that progresses from normal to full-blown usually within a few hours , not related to drug intake or brain injury . In addition , diagnostic criteria include at least four of the following symptoms : * Confusion * Mood-incongruent delusions * Hallucinations * Pan-anxiety , a severe anxiety not bound to particular situations or circumstances * Happiness or ecstasy of high degree * Motility disturbances of akinetic or hyperkinetic type * Concern with than what is needed for diagnosis of an affective disorder Cycloid psychosis occurs in people of generally 1550 years of age . # Causes # Many causes of schizophrenia are also causes of psychosis. # Medical conditions # A very large number of medical conditions can cause psychosis , sometimes called ' ' secondary psychosis ' ' . Examples include : * disorders causing ' ' delirium ' ' ( ' ' toxic psychosis ' ' ) , in which consciousness is disturbed * neurodevelopmental disorders and chromosomal abnormalities , including velocardiofacial syndrome * neurodegenerative disorders , such as Alzheimer 's disease , dementia with Lewy bodies , and Parkinson 's disease * focal neurological disease , such as stroke , brain tumors , multiple sclerosis , and some forms of epilepsy * malignancy ( typically via masses in the brain , paraneoplastic syndromes , or drugs used to treat cancer ) * infectious and postinfectious syndromes , including infections causing delirium , viral encephalitis , HIV , malaria , Lyme disease , syphilis * endocrine disease , such as hypothyroidism , hyperthyroidism , adrenal failure , Cushing 's syndrome , and sometimes childbirth can provoke psychosis , termed puerperal psychosis * inborn errors of metabolism , such as Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency , porphyria and metachromatic leukodystrophy * nutritional deficiency , such as vitamin B <sub> 12 </sub> deficiency * other acquired metabolic disorders , including electrolyte disturbances such as hypocalcemia , hypernatremia , hyponatremia , hypokalemia , hypomagnesemia , hypermagnesemia , hypercalcemia , and hypophosphatemia , but also hypoglycemia , hypoxia , and failure of the liver or kidneys * autoimmune and related disorders , such as systemic lupus erythematosus ( lupus , SLE ) , sarcoidosis , Hashimoto 's encephalopathy , and anti-NMDA-receptor encephalitis * poisoning , by therapeutic drugs ( see below ) , recreational drugs ( see below ) , and a range of plants , fungi , metals , organic compounds , and a few animal toxins * some sleep disorders , including hallucinations in narcolepsy ( in which REM sleep intrudes into wakefulness ) Psychosis can even be caused by familiar ailments such as flu or mumps. # Psychoactive drugs # Various psychoactive substances ( both legal and illegal ) have been implicated in causing users . This may be upon intoxication , for a more prolonged period after use , or upon withdrawal . Individuals who have a substance induced psychosis tend to have a greater awareness of their psychosis and tend to have higher levels of suicidal thinking compared to individuals who have a primary psychotic illness . Drugs that can induce psychotic symptoms include cannabis , cocaine , amphetamines , cathinones , psychedelic drugs ( such as LSD and psilocybin ) , -opioid receptor agonists ( such as enadoline and salvinorin A ) and NMDA receptor antagonists ( such as phencyclidine and ketamine ) . # #Alcohol# # Approximately three percent of people who are suffering from alcoholism experience psychosis during acute intoxication or withdrawal . Alcohol related psychosis may manifest itself through a kindling mechanism . The mechanism of alcohol-related psychosis is due to the long-term effects of alcohol resulting in distortions to neuronal membranes , gene expression , as well as thiamin deficiency . It is possible in some cases that alcohol abuse via a kindling mechanism can cause the development of a chronic substance induced psychotic disorder , i.e. schizophrenia risk of depression and suicide as well as causing psychosocial impairments . # #Cannabis# # According to some studies , the more often cannabis is used the more likely a person is to develop a psychotic illness , with frequent use being correlated with twice the risk of psychosis and schizophrenia . While cannabis use is accepted as a contributory cause of schizophrenia by some , it remains controversial , with pre-existing vulnerability to psychosis emerging as the key factor that influences the link between cannabis use and psychosis . Some studies indicate that the effects of two active compounds in cannabis , tetrahydrocannabinol ( THC ) and cannabidiol ( CBD ) , have opposite effects with respect to psychosis . While THC can induce psychotic symptoms in healthy individuals , CBD may reduce the symptoms caused by cannabis . Cannabis use has increased dramatically over the past few decades whereas the rate of psychosis has not increased . Together , these findings suggest that cannabis use may hasten the onset of psychosis in those who may already be predisposed to psychosis . High-potency cannabis use indeed seems to accelerate the concluded that cannabis plays an important role in the development of psychosis in vulnerable individuals , and that cannabis use in early adolescence should be discouraged . # #Methamphetamine# # Methamphetamine induces a psychosis in 26-46 percent of heavy users . Some of these people develop a long-lasting psychosis that can persist for longer than six months . Those who have had a short-lived psychosis from methamphetamine can have a relapse of the methamphetamine psychosis years later after a stress event such as severe insomnia or a period of heavy alcohol abuse despite not relapsing back to methamphetamine . Individuals who have long history of methamphetamine abuse and who have experienced psychosis in the past from methamphetamine abuse are highly likely to rapidly relapse back into a methamphetamine psychosis within a week or so of going back onto methamphetamine. # Medication # Administration , or sometimes withdrawal , of a large number of medications may provoke psychotic symptoms . Drugs that can induce psychosis experimentally and/or in a significant proportion of patients include amphetamine and other sympathomimetics , dopamine agonists , ketamine , corticosteroids ( often with mood changes in addition # A 2014 study found no evidence that familial risk accounts for associations between childhood physical abuse and psychotic disorder , or that it substantially increases the odds of psychosis among individuals reporting abuse . # Diagnosis # Researchers at the University of Edinburgh have demonstrated that structural and functional MRI can detect changes in the brain that precede the onset of diagnosis and could potentially be used as a diagnostic aid . # Pathophysiology # The first brain image of an individual with psychosis was completed as far back as 1935 using a technique called pneumoencephalography ( a painful and now obsolete procedure where cerebrospinal fluid is drained from around the brain and replaced with air to allow the structure of the brain to show up more clearly on an X-ray picture ) . The purpose of the brain is to collect information from the body ( pain , hunger , etc. ) , and from the outside world , interpret it to a coherent world view , and produce a meaningful response . The information from the senses enter the brain in the primary sensory areas . They process the information is interpreted . Spontaneous activity in the primary sensory areas may produce hallucinations , which the secondary areas misinterpret as information from the real world . For example , a PET or fMRI scan of a person who claims he hears voices may show activation in the primary auditory cortex , or parts of the brain involved in the perception and understanding of speech . Tertiary brain cortex collects the interpretations from the secondary cortexes and creates a coherent world view of it . A study investigating structural changes in the brains of people with psychosis showed there was significant grey matter reduction in the right medial temporal , lateral temporal , and inferior frontal gyrus , and in the cingulate cortex bilaterally of people before and after they became psychotic . Findings such as these have led to debate about whether psychosis itself causes excitotoxic brain damage and whether potentially damaging changes to the brain are related to the length of psychotic episode . Recent research has suggested that this is not the case although further investigation is still ongoing . Studies with sensory deprivation have shown that to function properly . If the spontaneous activity in the brain is not counterbalanced with information from the senses , loss from reality and psychosis may occur after some hours . A similar phenomenon is paranoia in the elderly , when poor eyesight , hearing and memory make the person abnormally suspicious of the environment . On the other hand , loss from reality may also occur if the spontaneous cortical activity is increased so that it is no longer counterbalanced with information from the senses . The 5-HT2A receptor seems to be important for this , since psychedelic drugs that activate them produce hallucinations . However , the main feature of psychosis is not hallucinations , but the inability to distinguish between internal and external stimuli . Close relatives to psychotic patients may hear voices , but since they are aware that they are unreal they can ignore them , so that the hallucinations do not affect their reality perception . Hence they are not considered psychotic . Psychosis has been traditionally linked to the neurotransmitter dopamine . In particular , the dopamine hypothesis of psychosis has been influential and in the brain , particularly in the mesolimbic pathway . The two major sources of evidence given to support this theory are that dopamine receptor D2 blocking drugs ( i.e. , antipsychotics ) tend to reduce the intensity of psychotic symptoms , and that drugs that boost dopamine activity ( such as amphetamines and cocaine ) can trigger psychosis in some people ( see amphetamine psychosis ) . However , increasing evidence in recent times has pointed to a possible dysfunction of the excitory neurotransmitter glutamate , in particular , with the activity of the NMDA receptor . This theory is reinforced by the fact that dissociative NMDA receptor antagonists such as ketamine , PCP and dextromethorphan ( at large overdoses ) induce a psychotic state more readily than dopaminergic stimulants , even at normal recreational doses . The symptoms of dissociative intoxication are also considered to mirror the symptoms of schizophrenia , including negative psychotic symptoms , more closely than amphetamine psychosis . Dissociative induced psychosis happens on a more reliable and predictable basis than amphetamine psychosis , which usually only occurs in cases of overdose , prolonged use or New antipsychotic drugs that act on glutamate and its receptors are currently undergoing clinical trials . The connection between dopamine and psychosis is generally believed complex . While dopamine receptor D2 suppresses adenylate cyclase activity , the D1 receptor increases it . If D2-blocking drugs are administered the blocked dopamine spills over to the D1 receptors . The increased adenylate cyclase activity affects genetic expression in the nerve cell , which takes time . Hence antipsychotic drugs take a week or two to reduce the symptoms of psychosis . Moreover , newer and equally effective antipsychotic drugs actually block slightly less dopamine in the brain than older drugs whilst also blocking 5-HT2A receptors , suggesting the ' dopamine hypothesis ' may be oversimplified . Soyka and colleagues found no evidence of dopaminergic dysfunction in people with alcohol-induced psychosis and Zoldan et al . reported moderately successful use of ondansetron , a 5-HT <sub> 3 </sub> receptor antagonist , in the treatment of levodopa psychosis in Parkinson 's disease patients . Psychiatrist David Healy has criticised pharmaceutical companies for promoting simplified biological theories of mental illness that seem to imply the primacy are known important influences in the aetiology of psychosis . Some theories believe many psychotic symptoms are a problem with the perception of ownership of internally generated thoughts and experiences . For example , the hallucination of hearing voices may arise from internally generated speech that is mislabeled by the psychotic person as coming from an external source . It has been suggested that persons with bipolar disorder may have increased activity of the left hemisphere compared to the right hemisphere of the brain , while persons with schizophrenia have increased activity in the right hemisphere . Increased level of right hemisphere activation has also been found in people who have high levels of paranormal beliefs and in people who report mystical experiences . It also seems that people who are more creative are also more likely to show a similar pattern of brain activation . Some researchers have been quick to point out that this in no way suggests that paranormal , mystical or creative experiences are in any way ' ' by themselves ' ' a symptom of mental illness , as it is still not clear what makes # In otherwise normal individuals , exogenous ligands can produce psychotic symptoms . NMDA receptor antagonists , such as ketamine , can produce a similar psychosis to that experienced in schizophrenia . Prolonged or high dose use of psychostimulants can alter normal functioning , making it similar to the manic phase of bipolar disorder . NMDA antagonists replicate some of the so-called negative symptoms like thought disorder in subanesthetic doses ( doses insufficient to induce anesthesia ) , and catatonia in high doses . Psychostimulants , especially in one already prone to psychotic thinking , can cause some positive symptoms , such as delusional beliefs , particularly those persecutory in nature . # Diagnosis # Psychosis is first and foremost a diagnosis of exclusion . So a new-onset episode of psychosis ' ' can not ' ' be considered a symptom of a psychiatric disorder until other relevant and known causes of psychosis are properly excluded , or ruled out . Many clinicians improperly perform , or entirely miss this step , introducing avoidable diagnostic error and misdiagnosis . An initial assessment includes a comprehensive history and physical examination by a assistant . Biological tests should be performed to exclude psychosis associated with or caused by substance use , medication , toxins , surgical complications , or other medical illnesses . Delirium should be ruled out , which can be distinguished by visual hallucinations , acute onset and fluctuating level of consciousness , indicating other underlying factors , including medical illnesses . Excluding medical illnesses associated with psychosis is performed by using blood tests to measure : * Thyroid-stimulating hormone to exclude hypo- or hyperthyroidism , * Basic electrolytes and serum calcium to rule out a metabolic disturbance , * Full blood count including ESR to rule out a systemic infection or chronic disease , and * Serology to exclude syphilis or HIV infection . Other investigations include : * EEG to exclude epilepsy , and an * MRI or CT scan of the head to exclude brain lesions . Because psychosis may be precipitated or exacerbated by common classes of psychiatric medications , such as antidepressants , ADHD stimulant medications , and sleep medications , medication-induced psychosis should be ruled out , particularly for first-episode psychosis . Both substance- and medication-induced , using a * Urinalysis and a * Full serum toxicology screening . Because some dietary supplements may also induce psychosis or mania , but can not be ruled out with laboratory tests , a psychotic individual 's family , partner , or friends should be asked whether the patient is currently taking any dietary supplements . Common mistakes made when diagnosing people who are psychotic include : * Not properly excluding delirium , * Not appreciating medical abnormalities ( e.g. , vital signs ) , * Not obtaining a medical history and family history , * Indiscriminate screening without an organizing framework , * Missing a toxic psychosis by not screening for substances ' ' and ' ' medications * Not asking family or others about dietary supplements , * Premature diagnostic closure , and * Not revisiting or questioning the initial diagnostic impression of primary psychiatric disorder . Only after relevant and known causes of psychosis are excluded , a mental health clinician may make a psychiatric differential diagnosis using a person 's family history , incorporating information from the person with psychosis , and information from family , psychiatric disorders may be established by formal rating scales . The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale ( BPRS ) assesses the level of 18 symptom constructs of psychosis such as hostility , suspicion , hallucination , and grandiosity . It is based on the clinician 's interview with the patient and observations of the patient 's behavior over the previous 23 days . The patient 's family can also answer questions on the behavior report . During the initial assessment and the follow-up , both positive and negative symptoms of psychosis can be assessed using the 30 item Positive and Negative Symptom Scale ( PANSS ) . # Prevention # The evidence for the effectiveness of early interventions to prevent psychosis appeared inconclusive . Whilst early intervention in those with a psychotic episode might improve short term outcomes , little benefit was seen from these measures after five years . However there is evidence that cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) may reduce the risk of becoming psychotic in those at high risk , and in 2014 the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence ( NICE ) recommended preventive CBT treatment of psychosis depends on the specific diagnosis ( such as schizophrenia , bipolar disorder or substance intoxication ) . The first line treatment for many psychotic disorders is antipsychotic medication ( oral or intramuscular injection ) , and sometimes hospitalization is needed . However , there are significant problems associated with this class of drugs . There is evidence that they can cause brain damage including prefrontal cortex atrophy , long-lasting parkinsonian symptoms ( tardive dyskinesia ) , and personality change . Nancy Andreasen has argued for an association between antipsychotic drugs and smaller grey matter volumes independent of illness severity . Furthermore , antipsychotic drugs can themselves induce psychotic symptoms if they are administered for a long time and then discontinued . There is growing evidence that cognitive behavior therapy , acceptance and commitment therapy and family therapy can be effective in managing psychotic symptoms . When other treatments for psychosis are ineffective , electroconvulsive therapy or ECT ( also known as shock treatment ) is sometimes applied to relieve the underlying symptoms of psychosis due to depression . There is also increasing research suggesting that animal-assisted therapy can schizophrenia . # Early intervention # Early intervention in psychosis is on the observation that identifying and treating someone in the early stages of a psychosis can improve their longer term outcome . This approach advocates the use of an intensive multi-disciplinary approach during what is known as the critical period , where intervention is the most effective , and prevents the long term morbidity associated with chronic psychotic illness . # History # The word ' ' psychosis ' ' was introduced to the psychiatric literature in 1841 by Karl Friedrich Canstatt in his work ' ' Handbuch der Medizinischen Klinik ' ' . He used it as a shorthand for ' psychic neurosis ' . At that time neurosis meant any disease of the nervous system , and Canstatt was thus referring to what was considered a psychological manifestation of brain disease . Ernst von Feuchtersleben is also widely credited as introducing the term in 1845 , as an alternative to insanity and mania . The term stems from the Greek ' ' ' ' ( ' ' psychosis ' ' ) , a giving soul or life to ' ( ' ' psyche ' ' ) , soul and the suffix ' ' - ' ' ( ' ' -osis ' ' ) , in this case abnormal condition . The word was also used to distinguish a condition considered a disorder of the mind , as opposed to ' ' neurosis ' ' , which was considered a disorder of the nervous system . The psychoses thus became the modern equivalent of the old notion of madness , and hence there was much debate on whether there was only one ( unitary ) or many forms of the new disease . One type of broad usage would later be narrowed down by Koch in 1891 to the ' psychopathic inferiorities ' - later renamed abnormal personalities by Schneider . The division of the major psychoses into manic depressive illness ( now called bipolar disorder ) and dementia praecox ( now called schizophrenia ) was made by Emil Kraepelin , who attempted to create a synthesis of the various mental disorders identified by 19th century psychiatrists , by grouping diseases together based on classification of common symptoms . Kraepelin the whole spectrum of mood disorders , in a far wider sense than it is usually used today . In Kraepelin 's classification this would include ' unipolar ' clinical depression , as well as bipolar disorder and other mood disorders such as cyclothymia . These are characterised by problems with mood control and the psychotic episodes appear associated with disturbances in mood , and patients often have periods of normal functioning between psychotic episodes even without medication . Schizophrenia is characterized by psychotic episodes that appear unrelated to disturbances in mood , and most non-medicated patients show signs of disturbance between psychotic episodes . During the 1960s and 1970s , psychosis was of particular interest to counterculture critics of mainstream psychiatric practice , who argued that it may simply be another way of constructing reality and is not necessarily a sign of illness . For example , R. D. Laing argued that psychosis is a symbolic way of expressing concerns in situations where such views may be unwelcome or uncomfortable to the recipients . He went on to say that psychosis could be also seen as a transcendental experience with of the term mystical psychosis to characterize first-person accounts of psychotic experiences that are similar to reports of mystical experiences . Thomas Szasz focused on the social implications of labeling people as psychotics , a label he argues unjustly medicalises different views of reality so such unorthodox people can be controlled by society . Psychoanalysis has a detailed account of psychosis that differs markedly from that of psychiatry . Freud and Lacan outlined their perspective on the structure of psychosis in a number of works . Since the 1970s , the introduction of a recovery approach to mental health , which has been driven mainly by people who have experienced psychosis ( or whatever name is used to describe their experiences ) , has led to a greater awareness that mental illness is not a lifelong disability , and that there is an expectation that recovery is possible , and probable with effective support . # Treatment # Early civilizations considered madness a supernaturally inflicted phenomenon . Archaeologists have unearthed skulls with clearly visible drillings , some datable back to 5000 BC suggesting that trepanning was a common treatment for psychosis resultant treatments can be traced back to the New Testament . Mark 5:8-13 describes a man displaying what would today be described as psychotic symptoms . Christ cured this demonic madness by casting out the demons and hurling them into a herd of swine . Exorcism , is still utilized in some religious circles as a treatment for psychosis presumed to be demonic possession . A research study of out-patients in psychiatric clinics found that 30 per cent of religious patients attributed the cause of their psychotic symptoms to evil spirits . Many of these patients underwent exorcistic healing rituals that , though largely regarded as positive experiences by the patients , had no effect on symptomology . Results did , however , show a significant worsening of psychotic symptoms associated with exclusion of medical treatment for coercive forms of exorcism . The medical teachings of the fourth-century philosopher and physician , Hippocrates of Cos , proposed a natural , rather than supernatural , cause of human illness . In Hippocrates ' work , the Hippocratic corpus , a holistic explanation for health and disease was developed to include madness and espoused a theory of humoralism wherein disease is resultant of a shifting balance in bodily fluids including blood , phlegm , black bile , and yellow bile . According to humoralism , each fluid or humour has temperamental or behavioral correlates . In the case of psychosis , symptoms are thought to be caused by an excess of both blood and yellow bile . Thus , the proposed surgical intervention for psychotic or manic behavior was bloodletting. 18th century physician , educator , and widely considered Founder of American Psychiatry , Benjamin Rush , also prescribed bloodletting as a first-line treatment for psychosis . Although not a proponent of humoralism , Rush believed that active purging and bloodletting were efficacious corrections for disruptions in the circulatory system , a complication he believed was the primary cause of insanity . Although Rush 's treatment modalities are now considered antiquated and brutish , his contributions to psychiatry , namely the biological underpinnings of psychiatric phenomenon including psychosis , have been invaluable to the field . In honor of such contributions , Benjamin Rush 's image is in the official seal of The American persisting psychosis were characterized by an emphasis on shocking the nervous system . Such therapies include insulin shock therapy , cardiazol shock therapy , and electroconvulsive therapy . Despite considerable risk , shock therapy was considered highly efficacious in the treatment of psychosis including schizophrenia . The acceptance of high-risk treatments led to more invasive medical interventions including psychosurgery . In 1888 , Swiss psychiatrist , Gottlieb Burckhardt , performed the first medically sanctioned psychosurgery in which the cerebral cortex was excised . Although some patients showed improvement of symptoms and became more subdued , one patient died and several developed aphasia and/or seizure disorders . Burckhardt would go on to publish his clinical outcomes in a scholarly paper . This procedure was met with criticism from the medical community and his academic and surgical endeavors were largely ignored . In the late 1930s , Egas Moniz conceived the leucotomy ( AKA prefrontal lobotomy ) in which the fibers connecting the frontal lobes to the rest of the brain were severed . Monizs primary inspiration stemmed from a demonstration by neuroscientists , John Fulton and Carlyles 1935 experiment in which two was compared . Prior to the leucotomy , the chimps engaged in typical behavior including throwing feces and fighting . After the procedure , both chimps were pacified and less violent . During the Q&amp;A , Moniz asked if such a procedure could be extended to human subjects , a question that Fulton admitted was quite startling . Moniz would go on to extend the controversial practice to humans suffering from various psychotic disorders , an endeavor for which he received a Nobel Prize in 1949 . Between the late 1930s and early 1970s , the leucotomy was a widely accepted practice , often performed in non-sterile environments such as small outpatient clinics and patient homes . Psychosurgery remained standard practice until the discovery of antipsychotic pharmacology in the 1950s . The first clinical trial of antipsychotics ( also commonly known as neuroleptics ) for the treatment of psychosis took place in 1952 . Chlorpromazine ( brand name : Thorazine ) passed clinical trials and became the first antipsychotic medication approved for the treatment of both acute and chronic psychosis . Although the mechanism of action was not discovered until 1963 dopamine antagonist , or first generation antipsychotic . While clinical trials showed a high response rate for both acute psychosis and disorders with psychotic features , the side-effects were particularly harsh , which included high rates of often irreversible Parkinsonian symptoms such as tardive dyskinesia . With the advent of atypical antipsychotics ( also known as second generation antipsychotics ) came a dopamine antagonist with a comparable response rate but a far different , though still extensive , side-effect profile that included a lower risk of Parkinsonian symptoms but a higher risk of cardiovascular disease . Atypical antipsychotics remain the first-line treatment for psychosis associated with various psychiatric and neurological disorders including schizophrenia , bipolar disorder , major depressive disorder , anxiety disorders , dementia , and some autism spectrum disorders . It is now known that dopamine is the primary neurotransmitter implicated in psychotic symptomology . Thus , blocking dopamine receptors ( namely , the dopamine D2 receptors ) and decreasing dopaminergic activity continues to be an effective but highly unrefined pharmacologic goal of antipsychotics . Recent pharmacological research suggests that the decrease in dopaminergic activity does not eradicate psychotic involved in the development of delusional thinking ; that is , connecting or finding meaningful relationships between unrelated stimuli or ideas . The author of this research paper acknowledges the importance of future investigation : 
 birthplace = Zolochiv , Poland ( now Ukraine ) religion = Roald Hoffmann ( born Roald Safran ; July 18 , 1937 ) is an American theoretical chemist who won the 1981 Nobel Prize in Chemistry . He is the Frank H. T. Rhodes Professor of Humane Letters , Emeritus , at Cornell University , in Ithaca , New York . # Early life # # Escape from the Holocaust # Hoffmann was born in Zolochiv , Poland ( now Ukraine ) , to a Jewish family , and was named in honor of the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen . His parents were Clara ( Rosen ) , a teacher , and Hillel Safran , a civil engineer . After Germany invaded Poland and occupied the town , his family was placed in a labor camp where his father , who was familiar with much of the local infrastructure , was a valued prisoner . As the situation grew more dangerous , with prisoners being transferred to liquidation camps , the family bribed guards to allow an escape and arranged with Ukrainian neighbors for Hoffman , his mother attic and a storeroom of the local schoolhouse , where they remained for fifteen months , while Hoffman was aged 5 to 7 . His father remained at the labor camp , but was able to occasionally visit , until he was tortured and killed by the Germans for his involvement in a plot to arm the camp prisoners . When she received the news , his mother attempted to contain her sorrow by writing down her feelings in a notebook her husband had been using to take notes on a relativity textbook he had been reading . While in hiding his mother kept Hoffman entertained by teaching him to read and having him memorize geography from textbooks stored in the attic , then quizzing him on it . He referred to the experience as having been enveloped in a cocoon of love . Most of the rest of the family perished in the Holocaust , though one grandmother and a few others survived . They migrated to the United States in 1949 . Hoffman visited Zolochiv with his adult son ( by then a parent of a five-year-old ) in was still intact , but the storeroom had been incorporated , ironically enough , into a chemistry classroom . In 2009 , a monument to Holocaust victims was built in Zolochiv on Hoffmann 's initiative . # Academic credentials # Hoffmann graduated in 1955 from New York City 's Stuyvesant High School , where he won a Westinghouse science scholarship . He received his Bachelor of Arts degree at Columbia University ( Columbia College ) in 1958 . He earned his Master of Arts degree in 1960 from Harvard University . He earned his Doctor of Philosophy degree from Harvard University while working under direction of subsequent 1976 Nobel Prize in Chemistry winner William N. Lipscomb , Jr . Under Lipscomb 's direction the Extended Hckel method was developed by Lawrence Lohr and by Roald Hoffmann . This method was later extended by Hoffmann . He went to Cornell in 1965 and has remained there , becoming professor emeritus . # Chemistry interests # Hoffmann has investigated both organic and inorganic substances , developing computational tools and methods such as the extended Hckel method , which he proposed in 1963 . for elucidating reaction mechanisms ( the WoodwardHoffmann rules ) . He also introduced the isolobal principle . # ' ' The World Of Chemistry ' ' with Roald Hoffmann # Hoffmann is the co-host of the Annenberg/CPB educational series , ' ' The World of Chemistry ' ' , with Don Showalter. # Artistic interests # Hoffmann is also a writer of poetry published in two collections , ' ' The Metamict State ' ' ( 1987 , ISBN 0-8130-0869-7 ) and ' ' Gaps and Verges ' ' ( 1990 , ISBN 0-8130-0943-X ) , and of books explaining chemistry to the general public . Also , he co-authored with Carl Djerassi the play ' ' Oxygen ' ' , about the discovery of oxygen , but also about what it means to be a scientist and the importance of process of discovery in science . Hoffmann stars in ' ' The World of Chemistry ' ' video series with Don Showalter . Since the spring of 2001 , Hoffmann has been the host of the monthly series ' ' Entertaining Science ' ' at New York City 's Cornelia and science . Hoffmann and Brian Alan produced an English cover of Wei Wei 's song Dedication of Love , part of an international music project raising funds to help the victims of the Sichuan Earthquake . # Awards # # Nobel Prize in Chemistry # In 1981 , Hoffmann received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry , which he shared with Kenichi Fukui for their theories , developed independently , concerning the course of chemical reactions . # Other awards # *Priestley Medal ( 1990 ) *Arthur C. Cope Award in Organic Chemistry *Organic Chemistry Award ( American Chemical Society ) , 1969 *Inorganic Chemistry Award ( American Chemical Society ) , 1982 *Pimentel Award in Chemical Education ( 1996 ) *Award in Pure Chemistry *Monsanto Award *Literaturpreis of the Verband der Chemischen Industrie for his textbook ' ' The Same and Not The Same ' ' ( 1997 ) *National Medal of Science *National Academy of Sciences *American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellow *American Philosophical Society Fellow *Kolos Medal *Foreign Member , Royal Society *Member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences *Harvard Centennial Medalist *James T. Grady-James H. International Academy of Quantum Molecular Science and is a member of the Board of Sponsors of The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . In August 2007 , the American Chemical Society held a symposium at its biannual national meeting to honor Hoffmann 's 70th birthday . He also has served as a consultant with Eli Lilly and Company , a global pharmaceutical corporation . 
 The Pogues are a Celtic punk band from London , formed in 1982 and fronted by Shane MacGowan . The band reached international prominence in the 1980s and early 1990s . MacGowan left the band in 1991 due to drinking problems but the band continued first with Joe Strummer and then with Spider Stacy on vocals before breaking up in 1996 . The band reformed in late 2001 , and has been playing regularly ever since , most notably on the US East Coast around St Patrick 's Day and across the UK and Ireland every December . The group has yet to record any new music and , according to Spider Stacy on Pogues.com , has no inclination to do so . Their politically tinged music was informed by MacGowan and Stacy 's punk backgrounds , yet used traditional Irish instruments such as the tin whistle , cittern , mandolin and accordion . The Pogues were founded in Kings Cross , a district of Central London , in 1982 as Pogue Mahone ' ' pogue mahone ' ' being the anglicisation of the Irish ' ' pg # Band history # The future members of the Pogues first met when MacGowan ( vocals ) , Peter Spider Stacy ( tin whistle ) , and Jem Finer ( banjo ) were together in an occasional band called The Millwall Chainsaws in the late 1970s after MacGowan and Stacy met in the toilets at a Ramones gig at The Roundhouse in 1977 . MacGowan was already with The Nips , though when they broke up in 1980 he concentrated a bit more on Stacy 's Millwall Chainsaws , who changed their name to The New Republicans . During this period MacGowan and Finer auditioned unsuccessfully for a licence to busk at Covent Garden . In 1982 James Fearnley ( accordion ) , who had been a guitarist with the Nips , joined MacGowan , Stacy , and Finer , forming the band , then known as Pogue Mahone . The new group played their first gig at The Pindar of Wakefield on 4 October 1982 . They then appeared at Gossips in Dean Street Soho on Thursday 3 November with Trash Trash Trash and The Stingrays . They later added ) . The band played London pubs and clubs , and released a single , Dark Streets of London , on their own , self-named label , gaining a small reputationespecially for their live performances . They came to the attention of the media and Stiff Records when they opened for The Clash on their 1984 tour . Shortening their name to The Pogues ( partly due to BBC censorship following complaints from Gaelic speakers in Scotland ) they released their first album ' ' Red Roses for Me ' ' on Stiff Records that October . The band gained more attention when the UK Channel 4 's influential music show ' ' The Tube ' ' made a video of their version of Waxie 's Dargle for the show . The performance , featuring Spider Stacy repeatedly smashing himself over the head with a beer tray , became a favourite with the viewers , but Stiff Records refused to release it as a single , feeling it was too late for it to help ' ' Red Roses for Me ' ' . Nevertheless , it remained a favourite request of punk and new wave forefather Elvis Costello they recorded the follow-up , ' ' Rum Sodomy &amp; the Lash ' ' , in 1985 during which time guitarist Philip Chevron joined . The album title is a famous comment falsely attributed to Winston Churchill who was supposedly describing the true traditions of the British Royal Navy . 2005 , and 2006 in polls by music channel VH1 UK , despite not achieving Christmas Number One when it was released . It was also voted as the 27th greatest song never to reach UK#1 in another VH1 poll , and also voted as the 84th greatest song of all time by BBC Radio 2 listeners in the Sold on Song top 100 poll . In 2007 the record was briefly censored by the BBC because of the word faggot being deemed potentially offensive to gay people . Following protests from listeners , including the mother of Kirsty MacColl , the censorship was lifted . The band was at the peak of its commercial success , with both albums making the top 5 in the UK ( numbers 3 and 5 respectively to turn up for the opening dates of their 1988 tour of America , and prevented the band from promoting their 1990 album ' ' Hell 's Ditch ' ' , so in 1991 the band sacked him . Vocal duties were for a time handled by Joe Strummer . Spider Stacy took over permanently after Strummer got sacked in spring 1992 . After Strummer 's departure , the remaining seven Pogues recorded in 1993 ' ' Waiting for Herb ' ' , which contained the band 's third and final top twenty single , Tuesday Morning , which became their best-selling single internationally . Terry Woods and James Fearnley then left the band and were replaced by David Coulter and James McNally respectively . Within months of their departures , ill health forced Phil Chevron to leave the band ; he was replaced by his former guitar technician , Jamie Clarke . This line-up recorded the band 's seventh ( and final ) studio album , ' ' Pogue Mahone ' ' . The album was a commercial failure , and , following Jem Finer 's decision to leave the time to call it quits . According to Shane MacGowan , amongst the reasons of the break-up was disagreement concerning the political orientation of his songs , the band not wanting to sing too obvious pro-republican songs though some of their previous songs were already politically engaged : for instance , ' ' Streams of Whiskey ' ' is about the poet and IRA member Brendan Behan . Soon after the break-up Shane MacGowan recorded a song called ' ' Paddy Public Enemy Number One ' ' as a tribute to the Republican leader Dominic McGlinchey , a former leader of the INLA killed a few years before . # Post-breakup # After the Pogues ' break-up , the three remaining long-term members ( Spider Stacy , Andrew Ranken and Darryl Hunt ) played together briefly as the Vendettas . They played mainly new Stacy-penned tracks , though Darryl Hunt also contributed songs , and the band 's live set included a few Pogues songs . First Ranken then Hunt left the band , the latter going on to become singer/songwriter in an indie band called Bish , whose self-titled debut to play with a number of other bands , including hKippers , The Municipal Waterboard and , most recently , The Mysterious Wheels . In addition to The Vendettas who Stacy freely admits lost all attraction when the Pogues reformed , Spider continued to write and record music with various bands , including the James Walbourne , Filthy Thieving Bastards , Dropkick Murphys and Astral Social Club . Shane MacGowan founded Shane MacGowan and The Popes in 1992 . They only managed two studio albums but struggled on until 2002 . His autobiography ' ' A Drink With Shane MacGowan ' ' , co-written with his journalist girlfriend Victoria Mary Clarke , was released in 2001 . Jem Finer went into experimental music , playing a big part in a project known as Longplayer , a piece of music designed to play continuously for 1,000 years without repeating itself . In 2005 , Finer released the album ' ' Bum Steer ' ' with DB Bob ( as DM Bob and Country Jem ) . James Fearnley moved to the United States shortly before leaving the Pogues . He was a Cranky George Trio . Philip Chevron reformed his former band The Radiators , which briefly included former Pogue Cait O'Riordan . Terry Woods formed The Bucks with Ron Kavana , releasing the album ' ' Dancin ' To The Ceili Band ' ' in 1994 . Later , he formed The Woods Band , releasing the album ' ' Music From The Four Corners of Hell ' ' in 2002. # Reunion # The band , including MacGowan , re-formed for a Christmas tour in 2001 and performed nine shows in the UK and Ireland in December 2004 . In 2002 ' ' Q ' ' magazine named The Pogues as one of the 50 Bands To See Before You Die . In July 2005 , the bandagain including MacGowanplayed at the annual Guilfest festival in Guildford before flying out to Japan where they played three dates . Japan is the last place they all played together before MacGowan was originally sacked in 1991 , and they have a strong following there . They played a date in Spain in early September . The reunited Pogues played dates in the UK and re-released their 1987 Christmas classic Fairytale of New York on 19 December , which went straight in at No. 3 in the UK Singles charts on Christmas Day 2005 , showing the song 's enduring popularity . On 22 December 2005 the BBC broadcast a live performance ( recorded the previous week ) on the Jonathan Ross Christmas show with Katie Melua filling in for the late Kirsty MacColl , the first time the band had played the song live on television . The following week they performed live on the popular music show ' ' CD:UK ' ' . Shane MacGowan wrote a blog for ' ' The Guardian ' ' website in 2006 , detailing his thoughts on the current tour . The band was awarded the lifetime achievement award at the annual Meteor Ireland Music Awards in February 2006 . In March 2006 , the band played their first US dates with Shane in over 15 years . The band played a series of sold-out concerts in Washington , D.C. , Atlantic City , Boston , and New York . Later they played a series of highly , Las Vegas , and Los Angeles , and toured Glasgow , Manchester , Birmingham , London , Dublin , and Nottingham in mid-December 2006 . They began a second US tour in March 2007 , once again to coincide ( and conclude ) with a Roseland Ballroom New York City show on Saint Patrick 's Day . 2007 has proved to be the most prolific year of touring since the reunion . A tour of the west coast of America and eleven dates in the UK in December complement the headlining festival appearances made in the summer across Europe ( Sweden , Belgium and Spain ) . They continue to be in huge demand , often selling out very large venues , despite criticism of selling out , and claims that arenas and festivals do not suit the band 's sound . Guitarist Phil Chevron has stated there were no plans to record new music or release a new album . Chevron said that one way to keep enjoying what they were doing was to avoid making a new album , although he did say that there still is a not in the near future . Terry Woods has commented that MacGowan has been writing , and most of it sounds good . In 2008 the band released a box set ' ' Just Look Them Straight in the Eye and Say .... POGUE MAHONE ! ! ' ' , which included rare studio out-takes and previously unreleased material . The band has received mixed reviews of some recent performances though they continue to pull the crowds . Reviewing a March 2008 concert , The ' ' Washington Post ' ' described MacGowan as puffy and paunchy , but said the singer still has a banshee wail to beat Howard Dean 's , and the singer 's abrasive growl is all a band this marvelous needs to give its amphetamine-spiked take on Irish folk a focal point . The reviewer continued : The set started off shaky , MacGowan singing of goin ' where streams of whiskey are flowin , ' and looking like he 'd arrived there already . He grew more lucid and powerful as the evening gathered steam , through two hours and 26 songs , mostly from . In December 2010 the Pogues ( with support from Crowns ) played what was billed as a farewell UK Christmas tour . In March 2011 , the Pogues played a six-city/ten-show sold out US tour titled A Parting Glass with The Pogues visiting Chicago , Detroit , Baltimore , Washington , D.C. , Boston , and New York City ( in that order ) , with only the last three cities getting more than one show . It may , or may not , be the last time they tour the States . Stacy said I think we are basically pretty certain this is the last tour of this type we 'll be doing in the States . There might be the odd sort of one-off here and there . We 're not saying this is absolutely , definitely the end . In August 2012 , the Pogues embarked on a 30th Anniversary Summer 2012 8-city European Tour scheduled from 4 August 2012 at the Stockton Weekender Festival in Stockton-on-Tees , UK to 11 &amp; 12 September 2012 at L'Olympia , Paris , two shows filmed and recorded for a In March 2013 the Pogues released ' ' 30:30 : The Essential Collection ' ' , a 2-disc set featuring 30 songs along with eleven videos . In October 2013 , the Pogues released a box set titled ' ' Pogues 30 ' ' containing remastered versions of all of their studio albums plus a previously unreleased live album featuring Joe Strummer at the London Forum in December 1991 . Guitarist Philip Chevron died on 8 October 2013 in Dublin , Ireland from oesophageal cancer at age 56. # Members # ; Current members * Spider Stacy vocals , tin whistle <small> ( 19821996 , 2001present ) </small> * Jem Finer banjo , mandola , saxophone , hurdy-gurdy , guitar , vocals <small> ( 19821996 , 2001present ) </small> * James Fearnley accordion , mandolin , piano , guitar <small> ( 19821993 , 2001present ) </small> * Shane MacGowan vocals , guitar , banjo , bodhrn <small> ( 19821991 , 2001present ) </small> * Andrew Ranken drums , percussion , harmonica , vocals <small> ( 19821996 , 2001present ) </small> * Darryl Hunt bass guitar <small> ( 19861996 , 2001present ) guitar , vocals <small> ( 19861993 , 2001present ) </small> ; Former members * Cait O'Riordan bass , vocals <small> ( 19821986 , 2004 ) </small> * Philip Chevron guitar , vocals <small> ( 19851994 , 20012013 ; his death ) </small> * Joe Strummer vocals , guitar <small> ( 19911992 ; also replaced an ailing Phil Chevron for a US tour in 1987 ; died 2002 ) </small> * Dave Coulter mandolin , violin , ukulele , percussion <small> ( 19931996 ) </small> * James McNally accordion , whistles , percussion <small> ( 19931996 ) </small> * Jamie Clarke guitar , vocals <small> ( 19941996 ) </small> # Timeline # <timeline> ImageSize = width:1100 height:550 PlotArea = left:95 bottom:80 top:0 right:10 Alignbars = justify DateFormat = dd/mm/yyyy Period = from:01/08/1982 till:31/12/2014 TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal format:yyyy Legend = position:bottom columns:4 Colors = id:Lines value:black legend:Studio releases id:voc value:red legend:Vocals id:g value:green legend:Guitars id:bj value:purple legend:Banjo , Saxophone id:acc value:rgb(0.5,0.35,0.3) legend:Accordion , Piano , Mando. id:tw value:yellow legend:Tinwhistle id:b value:blue legend:Bass , Backingvoc. id:dr value:orange legend:Drums , Harmonica id:cit value:brightgreen legend:Cittern , Mandolin id:acc/tw value:gray(0.4) legend:Accordion , Whistles , Percussion id:man value:lightpurple start:1983 ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:1 start:1983 LineData = at:01/10/1984 color:black layer:back at:01/08/1985 color:black layer:back at:01/01/1988 color:black layer:back at:01/07/1989 color:black layer:back at:06/11/1990 color:black layer:back at:01/09/1993 color:black layer:back at:27/02/1996 color:black layer:back BarData = bar:macgowan text : Shane MacGowan bar:strummer text : Joe Strummer bar:stacy text : Spider Stacy bar:finer text : Jem Finer bar:fearnley text : James Fearnley bar:mcnally text : James McNally bar:o'riordan text : Cait O'Riordan bar:hunt text : Darryl Hunt bar:ranken text : Andrew Ranken bar:chevron text : Philip Chevron bar:clarke text : Jamie Clarke bar:woods text : Terry Woods bar:coulter text : Dave Coulter PlotData= width:10 textcolor:black align:left anchor:from shift : ( 10 , -4 ) bar:macgowan from:01/08/1982 till:15/11/1991 color:voc bar:macgowan from:01/08/1982 till:31/12/1984 color:g width:3 bar:macgowan from:01/01/1985 till:15/11/1991 color:voc bar:macgowan from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:voc bar:strummer from:01/06/1987 till:31/03/1988 color:g bar:strummer from:20/11/1991 till:01/03/1992 color:voc bar:strummer from:20/11/1991 till:01/03/1992 color:g width:3 bar:stacy from:01/08/1982 till:01/06/1996 color:tw bar:stacy from:01/01/1985 till:31/12/1985 color:voc width:3 bar:stacy from:01/01/1989 till:28/02/1992 color:voc width:3 bar:stacy from:01/03/1992 till:01/06/1996 color:voc bar:stacy from:01/03/1992 till:01/06/1996 color:tw width:3 bar:stacy from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:tw bar:stacy from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:voc width:3 bar:finer from:01/08/1982 till:01/06/1996 color:bj bar:finer from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:bj bar:fearnley from:01/08/1982 till:30/09/1993 color:acc bar:fearnley from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:acc bar:mcnally from:01/10/1993 till:01/06/1996 color:acc/tw bar:o'riordan till:31/12/2004 color:voc bar:hunt from:01/09/1986 till:01/06/1996 color:b bar:hunt from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:b bar:ranken from:01/03/1983 till:01/06/1996 color:dr bar:ranken from:01/01/1987 till:31/12/1989 color:voc width:3 bar:ranken from:01/03/1992 till:01/06/1996 color:voc width:3 bar:ranken from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:dr bar:ranken from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:voc width:3 bar:chevron from:01/01/1985 till:01/06/1994 color:g bar:chevron from:01/01/1987 till:01/06/1994 color:voc width:3 bar:chevron from:01/12/2001 till:08/10/2013 color:g bar:chevron from:01/12/2001 till:08/10/2013 color:voc width:3 bar:clarke from:01/06/1994 till:01/06/1996 color:g bar:woods from:01/09/1985 till:31/12/1993 color:cit bar:woods from:01/09/1985 till:31/12/1993 color:voc width:3 bar:woods from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:cit bar:woods from:01/12/2001 till:31/12/2014 color:voc width:3 bar:coulter from:01/01/1994 till:01/06/1996 color:man </timeline> </div> # Discography # # Albums # # Live albums # # Compilation albums # # Video # * ' ' Live at The Town &amp; Country Club London 1988 ' ' VHS 1988 ; DVD 2003 * ' ' Saturday Nite Live Season 15 , Episode 16 Rob Lowe/The Pogues ' ' 1990 * ' ' Poguevision ' ' ( Music video Collection ) VHS 1991 ; DVD 2002 * ' ' Completely Pogued ' ' ( Documentary ) VHS 1991 ; DVD 2003 ( as extra on ' ' Live at the Town &amp; Country ' ' ) * ' ' The Pogues in Paris 30th Anniversary ' ' DVD 2012 
 The Beyonder is a fictional character in . # Publication history # Created by Jim Shooter and Mike Zeck , the Beyonder first appeared in ' ' Secret Wars ' ' #1 ( May 1984 ) as an unseen force . He reappears in ' ' Secret Wars II ' ' #1 ( July 1985 ) , which was written by Jim Shooter and drawn by Al Milgrom. # Fictional character biography # # Secret Wars # The Beyonder is the sum total of a parallel reality called the Beyond-Realm or simply Beyond , hence the name Beyonder . This dimension is accidentally accessed by nebbishy lab technician Owen Reece . Part of the energy from the dimension escapes and imbues Reece with near-infinite powers , which he wields as the villainous Molecule Man - potentially one of the most powerful villains in the Marvel Universe . The remaining energy of the pocket dimension apparently gains sentience and curiosity . Using its vast powers , the Beyonder creates a planet called Battleworld out of pieces of various planets ( one such piece being a suburb of Denver ) so that he can observe the never-ending battle between good and evil that rages within humanity at large . Initially explaining the nature of the experiment to the involuntary participants , the entity identifies itself only as I am from beyond . The name Beyonder is quickly applied by Galactus and adopted by all others present . Galactus , sensing that the Beyonder could alleviate his perpetual hunger , immediately and aggressively charges into the Beyond-Realm through a dimensional rift , followed by Doctor Doom , who seeks power for his own purposes . Both are repelled , but the information gathered by Doom later enables him to use the body of the sound-based villain Klaw as a medium to steal the energies of Galactus ' Worldship and then the power of the Beyonder itself . With the Beyonder 's power , Doom constructs a high tower of golden stone as temporary quarters , and then states that he has given up his ambitions for conquest , instead simply being content with freeing his mother 's soul from Mephisto . The Beyonder 's consciousness then possesses Klaw 's damaged mind and , distracting him enough for the Beyonder to steal his power back . This story formed the basis of the first ' ' Secret Wars ' ' twelve-issue limited series . The series sold incredibly well , with circulation reaching up to 750,000 copies per issue , numbers reminiscent of the height of comic book sales during the Golden Age of Comic Books # Secret Wars II # Due to the high sales of the first series , a second ' ' Secret Wars ' ' series , the nine-issue ' ' Secret Wars II ' ' miniseries , was published . This series crossed over into almost every comic that Marvel was publishing at the time . Intrigued by what he has witnessed during the first Secret Wars , the Beyonder comes to Earth to walk among humans and study them and learn of human desire firsthand . He creates a human body for himself ; originally , this body resembles Molecule Man . He also transforms a television writer named Steward Cadwell into Thundersword . Finally , the Beyonder creates a form for himself based on that of Captain lack of understanding of human biology and society , which leads to numerous difficult situations , some serious and some humorous . For instance , he needs to learn by example the difference between edible objects and non-edible ones , and needs to be toilet-trained by Spider-Man . When he learns about the monetary system from Luke Cage , the Hero for Hire , he transforms the Manhattan Heroes for Hire office building into gold as thanks for their assistance . He later comes under the influence of a criminal named Vinnie and becomes the head of a criminal cartel . The Beyonder then uses mind control to assume control over the entire Earth , only to relinquish control when he grows restless and frustrated with the lack of free will that the world now displays . Beyonder then transforms the elf Algrim into Kurse . The Beyonder became enamored with the beauty and power potential within singing superheroine Dazzler , resulting in a brief love affair . On a train to New York , the Beyonder meets the mutant Tabitha Smith ( also known as Boom Boom ) . Thinking The Beyonder abandons her but returns and takes her to Xavier 's school . At the school , Tabitha is terrified when the teams of the X-Men and the New Mutants fight the Beyonder . The Beyonder takes her to a planet where the Celestials are located . There , threatening to destroy the universe , the Beyonder fights and seemingly defeats a number of Celestials . Fearful of a further battle taking place between the Beyonder and the Celestials , Tabitha demands to be returned to Earth . Back on Earth , Boom Boom alerts the Avengers about the Beyonder . Summoning the Beyonder , Boom Boom thereby leads him into an ambush by the Avengers , Fantastic Four , and other costumed champions . The Beyonder , who had regarded Boom Boom as his only friend , allows the Avengers to defeat him , but then leaves . Boom Boom leaves during the battle . The Beyonder then acts in an attempt to preserve life throughout the universe by seemingly eliminating and then resurrecting the manifestation of Death . Throughout the course of the series , the demon Mephisto win the favor of Death . Mephisto sends an army of supervillains called the Legion Accursed to attack the Beyonder , who is saved by the Thing . The Beyonder then fights the Puma , believing that the only purpose left in his life is to help the Puma find his by allowing Puma to become one with the universe and allow Puma to slay him- Puma having been convinced of the Beyonder 's nature as a malicious threat- , but a casual comment by Spider-Man about the Beyonder 's manipulations causes Puma to lose faith in himself at the crucial moment , and the Beyonder survives unscathed . The Beyonder then feels the futility of all his efforts and decides to destroy the entire multiverse . He starts by killing the New Mutants . He then battles Phoenix . The Beyonder reconsiders destroying the Multiverse , and resurrects the New Mutants . Realizing that he can never truly understand what its like to be mortal as long as he has his powers as a safety net , he constructs a machine to leech and contain his powers , turning him becomes fearful of being without his power and takes his power back from the machine . Intrigued by this new experience , the Beyonder tries to create for himself a mortal human infant body that can retain his omnipotence , but will allow him to grow and learn at a normal rate . Although he is on the verge of succeeding , he is killed in the process by the Molecule Man . The Beyonder 's near-limitless power is returned to the now-empty Beyond-Realm , where it forms a Big Bang and creates a new universe . # Deadpool Team-Up # Long after the ' ' Secret Wars II ' ' crossover had ended , a Deadpool special featured the Secret Wars II continues in this issue corner tag that was used during that original storyline . In this issue , a younger , less-experienced Deadpool is hired by the Kingpin to kill the Beyonder . The flashback sequence ends with Deadpool chasing him into a portal with a footnote saying to be continued in Secret Wars III . This storyline has yet to be followed up on . # Kosmos years later when it is revealed that the energy which comprises the Beyonder and the energy that gives the Molecule Man his powers needs to be combined in order to create the basis for a mentally stable , mature , nigh-omnipotent being to be born . The Beyonder then merges with the Molecule Man . This being , called Kosmos ( Marvel Comics ) At some unknown point , Kosmos goes mad and assumes a mortal form , now calling itself the Maker . After the now amnesiac Maker destroys a Shi'ar colony , the Imperial Guard manage to imprison it in the interstellar prison called the Kyln . The Maker 's madness takes control of several inmates , but is finally subdued by the nihilist Thanos and several of his allies among the prisoners . Thanos confronts the Maker , and , by refusing to reveal its origins at a critical juncture , manipulates it to psychically shut down its own mind . Thanos instructs the Shi'ar that the body should be kept alive but brain-dead , or the Beyonder essence would go free again . Apparently , Thanos had never been explained , as Thanos was dead at the time of Secret Wars II . Thanos ' flashback showed Thanos as a youngster . # ' ' Beyond ! ' ' and Annihilation # The Beyonder returned in the series named after him , Beyond ! . This being was called The Beyonder in the second issue . This Beyonder is once again in command of the patchwork Battleworld , where it is revealed that he has been collecting various superhumans and pitting them in combat with one another . Eventually , the pool of heroes and villains featured in the mini-series discovers that this Beyonder is actually the Stranger , who has been conducting studies of super-humanity through re-creations of the original Secret War . In the Annihilation crossover , the former Herald of Galactus , the Fallen One , now under the control of Thanos , is sent to investigate the aftermath of the Kyln 's destruction by the Annihilation Wave and ascertain the Beyonder 's fate . The Fallen One soon finds the lifeless form of Kosmos in the rubble . # New Avengers : The Illuminati ' #3 , featuring a retcon of past events , Charles Xavier reveals that in the original Secret War , he had initially planned to use his powers to make everyone fall asleep and thus buy him and Reed Richards time to formulate an escape plan , but feared the Beyonder 's wrath . However , he immediately sensed a strange mental presence and attempted to mind-scan the Beyonder , revealing him as one of the Inhumans previously ruled over by fellow Illuminati member Black Bolt . Xavier also deduced the apparent secret behind the Beyonder 's seemingly godlike abilities , which was that the Beyonder was not only an Inhuman but also a mutant , like Xavier and his own team of X-Men , and the exposure of his mutant genes to Terrigen Mists had created an unprecedented reaction , bestowing upon him more amazing power and knowledge than all other Inhumans of his time . This revelation leads to a confrontation with the Beyonder during the events of the second Secret War , wherein Black Bolt expresses his extreme displeasure toward the Beyonder 's activities . When encountered , on Ceres ( dwarf planet ) The story itself is deliberately ambiguous ; Black Bolt , for example , does not remember the mutant Inhuman who vanished , making it possible the Beyonder arranged all this as a mind game , as he had when he lived as a human and a mutant , trying to find a purpose in his existence . # Powers and abilities # Although not native to this dimension , the Beyonder was one of the absolute strongest and most powerful beings ever to exist in the Marvel Universe . In the original Secret Wars storyline , he was the be-all and end-all of the Marvel universe that took human form to better understand the nature of human beings , and capable of destroying the entire multiverse or the conceptual entity Death itself . After his creator , Jim Shooter , left Marvel , writer-editor Tom DeFalco , displeased with Shooter 's tenure at Marvel , re-tooled the Beyonder and altered his origin . He was no longer omnipotent as many initially believed , being an incomplete Cosmic Cube , with less raw power and the possessed vast psionic abilities allowing him to control and manipulate matter and energy at a cosmic level beyond all but the strongest and most powerful of cosmic entities . He was shown and described to repel Galactus like a bug , and even greatly exceeded the collected energy of the latter 's World-Ship . He once destroyed a galaxy on a whim to meet his needs during the first Secret Wars , and later , by using his entire energies , created a universe out of his own being . When the Molecule Man extracted the Beyonder from Kosmos , their battle took place in more than three dimensions , and threatened vast portions of reality . In Kosmos ' ' Maker ' incarnation , she was stated as capable of reversing The Crunch itself , essentially collapsing the entire universe . The Beyonder could endow himself with a corporeal form of practically limitless strength and endurance . However , his scale of power has been claimed to be below that of the Living Tribunal and Eternity , the Celestials , or the Molecule Man ( when unfettered from his emotional timeline seen in ' ' Guardians of the Galaxy ' ' , the Beyonder provides Guardian Vance Astro with a black undergarment resembling a Symbiote . In the alternate Earth of ' ' Mutant X ( comics ) Mister Mxyzptlk parodied the Beyonder in his first appearance in the post-Crisis continuity by assuming a form and identity that was similar in clothing and appearance to the Beyonder . He called himself Ben Deroy , an anagram of the name Beyonder . When asked by Lois Lane where he came from , he answers by saying , Oh ... here and there . Yonder , let 's say . Yes . Yonder . In the ' ' Spider-Ham ' ' universe , The Bee-Yonder briefly appears to give Spider-Ham a version of the black uniform , stating that the familiar red-and-blue uniform was out of style . # In other media # The Beyonder makes an appearance in the ' ' Spider-Man ' ' cartoon voiced by Earl Boen . However , his appearance in the cartoon greatly differs from his normal comics , featuring the brief super hero costume the Beyonder and a goatee as opposed to having a clean-shaven face with a disco outfit . He is also more of a neutral force than a villain . The Beyonder first appeared in the episode Arrival of Season 5 , the first chapter of that Secret Wars in the series . The Beyonder worked with Madame Web to prepare Spider-Man for the Secret Wars , supposedly to see whether good was more powerful than evil . He put Spider-Man and a small group of heroes selected by the web-slinger ( Fantastic Four , Captain America , Iron Man , Storm , and the Black Cat ) on a planet and pit them against a band of villains ( Doctor Octopus , Doctor Doom , Alistair Smythe , the Lizard , and the Red Skull ) . During this time , Doctor Doom stole the Beyonder 's powers in Doom ( the third and last chapter to the Secret Wars ) , but he was defeated , and it was implied that he had planned the whole ordeal out before it began . The Beyonder had all the heroes Spider-Man had summoned to . Spider-Man , however , was needed for something bigger , so he was the only one whose memory was untouched . It was revealed that the evil Spider-Carnage had destroyed the entire multiverse with a giant bomb . However , when the destruction reached the Beyonder 's own reality , he used all of his powers to roll back time , but since his powers were unlimited only in his own universe he would be unable to permanently undo Spider-Carnage 's actions himself . Though it tested him to the extreme , he sent his servant , Madame Web , into the past to train Spider-Men from many different realities to find out which one would be worthy enough to lead the others against Spider-Carnage. 
 * Augustus III ascends the throne * Bourbon territorial gains The War of the Polish Succession ( 17331738 ) was a major European war for princes ' possessions sparked by a Polish civil war over the succession to Augustus II , King of Poland that other European powers widened in pursuit of their own national interests . France and Spain , the two Bourbon powers , attempted to check the power of the Austrian Habsburgs in western Europe , as did the Kingdom of Prussia ; whilst Saxony and Russia mobilized to support the eventual Polish victor . The slight amount of fighting in Poland resulted in the accession of Augustus III , who in addition to Russia and Saxony , was politically supported by the Habsburgs . The war 's major military campaigns occurred outside Poland . The Bourbons , supported by Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia , moved against isolated Habsburg territories . In the Rhineland France successfully took the Duchy of Lorraine , and in Italy Spain regained control over the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily ( lost in the War of the Spanish Succession despite bloody campaigning . Great Britain 's unwillingness to support Habsburg Austria demonstrated major cracks in the Anglo-Austrian Alliance and may have contributed to Austria 's military failures . Although a preliminary peace was reached in 1735 , the war was formally ended with the Treaty of Vienna ( 1738 ) in which Augustus III was confirmed as king of Poland and his opponent Stanisaw Leszczyski ( who had received virtually no foreign military support ) was awarded the Duchy of Lorraine . Francis Stephen , the duke of Lorraine , was given the Grand Duchy of Tuscany in compensation for the loss of Lorraine . The Duchy of Parma went to Austria whereas Charles of Parma took the crowns of Naples and Sicily , resulting in territorial gains for the Bourbons . Poland also gave up claims to Livonia and direct control over the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia , which , although remaining a Polish fief , was not integrated into Poland proper , and came under strong Russian influence . # Background # Ever since the death of Sigismund II Augustus in 1572 , Polish kings were elected great deal of power over the king , but the sejms ( meetings of delegates ) to elect kings and conduct other business were in later years paralyzed by the institution of the Liberum Veto , which gave any individual in the sejm the power to negate its decisions . As a result , Poland 's powerful neighbors were able to exert significant influence on the decision-making process , and by the early 18th century the system was in decline . Former Polish King Stanisaw Leszczyski hoped to be elected king once again upon the death of his old adversary , Augustus II of Saxony , who had failed in his attempts to make the Polish crown hereditary within his family . Thirty years earlier , Stanisaw had been installed as king of Poland by King Charles XII of Sweden during his period of dominance in the early part of the Great Northern War , and was ousted following the Battle of Poltava by the victorious Russians . Stanisaw was supported in his bid to regain the throne by his son-in-law , King Louis XV of France , who hoped to to balance Russian and Austrian power in central , northern and eastern Europe . In 1732 Empress Anna of Russia , Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI and King Frederick William I of Prussia , irritated with Augustus but unwilling to allow Stanisaw to become king , secretly signed Lwenwolde 's Treaty , in which they agreed to jointly back the candidacy of Infante Manuel of Portugal for the Polish throne . France 's prime minister , Cardinal Fleury , saw the Polish struggle as a chance to strike at Austrian power in the west without seeming to be the aggressor . While he cared little for who should become King of Poland , the cause of protecting the King 's father-in-law was a sympathetic one , and he hoped to use the war as a means of humbling the Austrians , and perhaps securing the long-desired Duchy of Lorraine from its duke , Francis Stephen , who was expected to marry Emperor Charles 's daughter Maria Theresa , which would bring Austrian power dangerously close to the French border . Fleury 's diplomatic moves would bring additional powers into the war Spain and the Charles Emmanuel , the King of Sardinia who was also the Duke of Savoy . # Death of Augustus II # Augustus II died on February 1 , 1733 . Throughout the spring and summer of 1733 , France began building up forces along its northern and eastern frontiers , while the emperor massed troops on Polish borders , reducing garrisons in the Duchy of Milan for the purpose . While the aging Prince Eugene of Savoy had recommended to the emperor a more warlike posture against potential actions by France in the Rhine valley and northern Italy , only minimal steps were taken to improve imperial defenses on the Rhine . The Marquis de Monti , France 's ambassador in Warsaw , convinced the rival Potocki and Czartoryski families to unite behind Stanisaw . Teodor Potocki , Primate of Poland and interrex following the death of Augustus , called a convocation sejm in March 1733 . Delegates to this sejm passed a resolution forbidding the candidacy of foreigners ; this would explicitly exclude both Emmanuel of Portugal and Augustus II 's son , Frederick August II , Austria and Russia in July 1733 . In exchange for Russian support , he agreed to give up any remaining Polish claims to Livonia , and promised to Anna of Russia her choice of successor to the Duchy of Courland , a Polish fief ( of which she had been duchess prior to her ascension to the Russian throne ) which would have otherwise come under direct Polish rule on the death of the current duke , Ferdinand Kettler , who had no heirs . To the Austrian emperor he promised recognition of the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 , a document designed to guarantee inheritance of the Austrian throne to Maria Theresa , Charles ' oldest child . In August , Polish nobles gathered for the election sejm . On August 11 , 30,000 Russian troops under Field Marshal Peter Lascy entered Poland in a bid to influence the sejm 's decision . On September 4 , France openly declared its support for Leszczyski , who was elected king by a sejm of 12,000 delegates on September 12 . A group of nobles , led by Lithuanian magnates including Duke Michael II ) , crossed the Vistula River to Praga and the protection of Russian troops . This group , numbering about 3,000 , elected Frederick August II King of Poland as Augustus III on October 5 . Despite the fact that this group was a minority , Russia and Austria , intent on maintaining their influence within Poland , recognised Augustus as king . On October 10 , France declared war on Austria and Saxony . Louis XV was later joined by his uncle , King Philip V of Spain , who hoped to secure territories in Italy for his sons by his second marriage to Elizabeth Farnese . Specifically , he hoped to secure Mantua for the elder son , Don Carlos , who was already Duke of Parma and had the expectation of the Grand Duchy of Tuscany , and the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily for the younger son , Don Felipe . The two Bourbon monarchs were also joined by Charles Emmanuel of Savoy , who hoped to secure gains from the Austrian Duchies of Milan and Mantua. # Austrian isolation # When hostilities finally broke out powers , Great Britain and the Dutch Republic . They were disappointed in this , since both the Dutch and the British chose to pursue a policy of neutrality . The British Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole justified Britain 's non-intervention by insisting that the Anglo-Austrian Alliance agreed at the 1731 Treaty of Vienna was a purely defensive agreement , while Austria was in this instance the aggressor . This position was attacked by English Austrophiles who wanted to aid the Austrians against France , but Walpole 's dominant position ensured that Britain stayed out of the conflict . The French , not wishing to provoke Britain , carefully chose not to campaign in the Austrian Netherlands and avoided campaigning in parts of the Holy Roman Empire that might draw either power into the conflict . On Austria 's southern border , France in November 1733 negotiated the secret Treaty of Turin with Charles Emmanuel and prepared for military operations in northern Italy . It concluded the ( also secret ) Treaty of the Escorial with Spain , which included promises of French assistance in the Spanish conquest of Naples and the Ottoman Empire in a fruitless attempt to draw them into the conflict in support of Stanisaw . The Austrians were thus left largely without effective external allies on their southern and western frontiers . Their Russian and Saxon allies were occupied with the Polish campaign , and the Emperor distrusted Frederick William I of Prussia , who was willing to provide some aid . Divisions within the empire also had an impact on the raising of troops in 1733 , as Charles-Albert of Bavaria , who harbored ambitions to become the next Holy Roman Emperor , signed a secret agreement with France in November 1733 , and tried , with limited success , to dissuade other rulers within the empire from the Wittelsbach family from providing troops to the emperor under their treaty obligations . While Britain itself did not provide support , the Electorate of Hanover , where George II also ruled as an Imperial Elector , proved willing to help . # War # # Poland # The Russians , led by Lascy , quickly took Warsaw and installed Augustus , forcing Stanisaw to flee to Danzig ( time by a Russian-Saxon army that came under the overall command of Field Marshal Burkhard Christoph von Mnnich . Danzig capitulated in June 1734 , and Stanisaw fled , first to Knigsberg , and eventually to France . This ended major military activity in Poland itself , although it continued to be occupied by foreign troops as Augustus dealt with partisan supporters of Stanisaw . A group of nobles supporting Stanisaw formed the Confederation of Dzikow late in 1734 , and under their commander , Adam Taro , tried to fight the Russians and Saxons , but their efforts were ineffective . In what became known as the Pacification Sejm , held JuneJuly 1736 , Augustus was confirmed as king . # Rhineland # Following France 's October 10 declaration of war , it began military operations three days later , invading the Duchy of Lorraine and besieging the imperial fortress at Kehl , across the Rhine River from Strasbourg , gaining control of both objectives in a few weeks . Unable to attack Austria directly , and unwilling to invade the intervening German states for fear of drawing Great Britain position in Lorraine , and withdrew its troops across the Rhine for the winter . The emperor mobilized his active forces in response to the French attacks , and began the process of calling up troops from the states of the empire , establishing a defensive line at Ettlingen , near Karlsruhe . In the spring of 1734 French maneuvers successfully flanked this line , and Prince Eugene of Savoy ( who , despite being born in Paris , fought on the Austrian side ) was forced to withdraw these forces to the imperial encampment at Heilbronn . This cleared the way for the French army under the Duke of Berwick to besiege the imperial fort at Philippsburg , which fell after a siege of two months in July 1734 . Eugene , who was accompanied by Crown Prince Frederick of Prussia , made some attempts to relieve the siege , but never made any decisive attacks against the besieging army owing to its size and relatively poor quality of the troops under his command . Berwick was killed by a shell at Philippsburg . French armies continued to advance along the growing imperial army , which came to include troops from Russia that had assisted with the capture of Danzig , was able to prevent France from establishing a siege there , and Eugene went on the offensive . A force of 30,000 under Friedrich Heinrich von Seckendorff crossed the Rhine and began pushing the French back toward Trier , defeating them at Clausen in October 1735 , in one of the last battles before preliminary peace terms were reached . # Italy # French and Savoyard troops numbering over 50,000 , under the command of Charles Emmanuel , entered Milanese territory as early as October 24 , against minimal resistance , as the Austrian forces in the duchy numbered only about 12,000 . By November 3 , the city of Milan itself had surrendered , although the Austrian governor , Count Wirich Philipp von Daun , still held the fortress . France 's great general , the Duke de Villars , joined Charles Emmanuel in Milan on November 11 . While Villars wanted to immediately move to secure the Alpine passes against Austrian reinforcements by moving against Mantua , Charles with Spain , sought to secure Milan . The army spent the next three months eliminating Austrian opposition from the remaining fortified towns in the duchy . Villars attempted to interest Don Carlos of Parma in joining the expedition against Mantua , but Carlos was focused on the campaign into Naples . Villars began to move against Mantua , but Charles Emmanuel resisted , and the army made little progress . In early May , an Austrian army of 40,000 under Count Claude Florimond de Mercy crossed the Alps and threatened to close in on the French army 's rear by a flanking maneuver . Villars responded by retreating from Mantua and attempted without success to interrupt the Austrian army 's crossing of the Po River . Villars , frustrated by Charles Emmanuel 's delaying tactics , quit the army on May 27 . He fell ill on the way back to France and died in Turin on June 17 . Mercy 's forces made repeated attempts to cross the Parma River in June , but it was not until late in that month that they were able to cross the allied forces , now under the command of French marshals de Broglie and Coigny , were entrenched . In a bloody battle near the village of Crocetta on June 29 , the Austrians were beaten back , Mercy was killed , and Frederick of Wrttemberg , his second , was wounded . Charles Emmanuel returned the next day to retake command , and resumed his delaying tactics by failing to immediately pursue the retreating Austrians . The Austrians retreated to the Po , where they were reinforced by additional troops and placed under the command of Field Marshal Knigsegg . After two months of inaction , during which the armies faced each other across the Secchia River , Knigsegg on September 15 took advantage of lax security and executed a raid on Coigny 's headquarters at Quistello , very nearly capturing Coigny and taking among other prizes Charles Emmanuel 's china . Two days later the French withdrew to a position near Guastalla in response to Austrian maneuvers , but one detachment of nearly 3,000 men was surrounded and captured by the advancing Austrians . On September 19 , Knigsegg attacked encounter , was beaten back , losing among others Frederick of Wrttemberg . Knigsegg retreated across the Po , adopting a defensive position between the Po and the Oglio while Charles Emmanuel again did not capitalize on his victory . When he finally withdrew most of the allied army to Cremona , the Austrians advanced on the north bank of the Po as far as the Adda before both armies entered winter quarters in December 1734 . In southern Italy , the Austrians , choosing a strategy of defending a large number of fortresses , were soundly defeated . Don Carlos assembled an army composed primarily of Spaniards , but also including some troops from France and Savoy . Moving south through the Papal States , his army flanked the frontline Austrian defense at Mignano , forcing them to retreat into the fortress at Capua . He was then practically welcomed into Naples by the city fathers , as the Austrian viceroy had fled toward Bari , and the fortresses held by the Austrians in the city were quickly captured . While maintaining a blockade of the largest Austrian holdings at army gave chase to the remaining Austrian forces . These finally attempted a stand in late May , and were defeated at Bitonto . Capua and Gaeta were then properly besieged while Austrian fortresses in Sicily were quickly subdued . Gaeta surrendered in August , and Capua held out until November when its commander , Otto Ferdinand von Abensberg und Traun , finally negotiated surrender terms when he ran out of ammunition . The Jacobite pretender to the thrones of United Kingdom and France , Charles Edward Stuart , who was under 14 then , also participated in the French and Spanish siege of Gaeta , making his first exposure to battle . The armies in northern Italy suffered significantly over the winter , with significant losses to disease and desertion . For the 1735 campaign the allied forces in northern Italy came under the command of the Duke de Noailles , elevated to Marshal after his successful contributions to the Rhine campaign . They were also joined by Spanish forces in May , now available after the successes in the south . In response to this threat , Knigsegg retreated city of Mantua well-defended . At this point divisions between the allies became clear , as Spain laid claim to Mantua , and also refused to guarantee Milan to Charles Emmanuel . In response , Charles Emmanuel refused to allow his siege equipment to be used against Mantua . As a result , the Franco-Spanish army was unable to do more than blockade the city . When Charles Emmanuel withdrew his forces from the area , the allies were forced to retreat , and the beleaguered Austrians capitalized , eventually recovering most of Milan against little opposition in November . # Peace settlement # As early as February 1734 the British and Dutch had offered to mediate peace talks between the various parties . By early 1735 , proposals were being circulated . As 1735 progressed with the Austrians being in no real position to continue the fight , and the French concerned by the possible arrival of Russian reinforcements on the Rhine ( which did eventually occur ) , negotiations continued through the summer of 1735 . A preliminary peace was finally concluded in October 1735 and ratified in the as king of Poland , Stanisaw was compensated with Lorraine ( which would pass on his death , through his daughter , to the French ) , while the former Duke of Lorraine , Francis Stephen , was made heir to the Grand Duchy of Tuscany . Charles of Parma gave up Parma , which came under direct Austrian rule , but he was richly compensated by being confirmed instead as king of Naples and Sicily . Although fighting stopped after the preliminary peace in 1735 , the final peace settlement had to wait until the death of the last Medici Grand Duke of Tuscany , Gian Gastone in 1737 , to allow the territorial exchanges provided for by the peace settlement to go into effect . The French ( and their allies ) , hoping for dtente and good relations with the Austrians , now also recognized the Pragmatic Sanction that would allow Emperor Charles 's daughter Maria Theresa to succeed him . This proved a hollow guarantee , however , as the French decided to intervene to partition the Habsburg Monarchy after all following the death of Charles in king , however , proved of lasting benefit to France , as it passed under direct French rule with Stanisaw 's death in 1766 . Stanisaw signed the act of abdication in 1736 , while Augustus III pronounced a general amnesty . Winiowiecki was rewarded : the king made him the Grand Hetman ( commander-in-chief ) of Lithuania 
 NOTOC Year 1838 ( MDCCCXXXVIII ) was a common year starting on Monday ( link will display the full calendar ) of the Gregorian Calendar and a common year starting on Saturday of the 12-day slower Julian calendar . # Events # # January&amp;ndash ; March # * January 10 &amp;ndash ; A fire destroys Lloyd 's Coffee House and the Royal Exchange in London . * January 21 &amp;ndash ; The first known report about the lowest temperature on Earth was made , indicating 60 C ( 76 F ) in Yakutsk . # April&amp;ndash ; June # * April 4&amp;ndash ; 22 &amp;ndash ; The paddle steamer SS ' ' Sirius ' ' ( 1837 ) makes the Transatlantic Crossing to New York from Cork , Ireland , in eighteen days , though not using steam continuously . * April 8&amp;ndash ; 23 &amp;ndash ; Isambard Kingdom Brunel 's paddle steamer ( 1838 ) makes the Transatlantic Crossing to New York from Avonmouth , England , in fifteen days , inaugurating a regular steamship service . * April 30 &amp;ndash ; Nicaragua declares independence from the People 's Charter is drawn up in the United Kingdom , demanding universal suffrage . ** Lord Durham and his entourage arrive in Upper Canada to investigate the cause of the 1837 rebellion in that province . This leads to Durham submitting the Durham Report to Britain . ** An insurrection breaks out in Tizimn , beginning the campaign for the independence of Yucatan from Mexico . * May 26 &amp;ndash ; The people of the Cherokee Nation are forcibly relocated during the Trail of Tears in the United States . * May 28 &amp;ndash ; Braulio Carrillo is sworn in as Head of State of Costa Rica , thus beginning his second term in office . * June 10 &amp;ndash ; 28 Indigenous Australians are killed in the Myall Creek Massacre . * June 28 &amp;ndash ; Coronation of Queen Victoria takes place at Westminster Abbey in London . # July&amp;ndash ; September # * September 7 &amp;ndash ; Grace Darling and her father rescue thirteen survivors from the SS ' ' Forfarshire ' ' off the Farne Islands . # October&amp;ndash ; December # * October 1 &amp;ndash ; victorious in the Battle of Maella during the First Carlist War . * October 27 &amp;ndash ; Lilburn W. Boggs , Governor of Missouri , by Missouri Executive Order 44 declares Mormons to be enemies of the state and encourages the extermination or exile of the religious minority , forcing nearly 10,000 Mormons out of the state . * November 3 &amp;ndash ; ' ' The Bombay Times and Journal of Commerce ' ' is founded ( renamed ' ' The Times of India ' ' in 1861 ) . * November 5 &amp;ndash ; Dissolution of the Federal Republic of Central America : Honduras and Costa Rica follow the example of Nicaragua and secede from the federation . * December 16 &amp;ndash ; The Boers win a decisive victory over the Zulus in the Battle of Blood River . * December ** First Anglo-Afghan War : British and Presidency armies set out from Punjab in support of Shah Shujah Durrani 's claim to the throne of Afghanistan . ** Pastry War : Mexico is invaded by French forces . # Date unknown # * Proteins are discovered by Gerardus Johannes makes the first accurate measurement of distance to a star . * The Pitcairn Islands become a Crown colony of the United Kingdom ; and women there are the first in the world to be granted and maintain women 's suffrage . * Five nuns from the Religious Sisters of Charity in Ireland become the first women of religion to set foot on Australian soil . * Biblical criticism : Christian Hermann Weisse proposes the two-source hypothesis . * Duke University is established in North Carolina . * The 5th century BC bronze Chatsworth Head is acquired by the 6th Duke of Devonshire at Smyrna from H. P. Borrell. # Births # # January&amp;ndash ; June # * January 4 &amp;ndash ; General Tom Thumb , American circus performer and entertainer ( d. 1883 ) * January 6 &amp;ndash ; Max Bruch , German composer ( d. 1920 ) * January 16 &amp;ndash ; Franz Brentano , German philosopher and psychologist ( d. 1917 ) * February 6 &amp;ndash ; Henry Irving , English actor ( d. 1905 ) * February 9 &amp;ndash ; Evelyn Wood , British field marshal and &amp;ndash ; Gustav Oelwein , founder of Oelwein , Iowa ( d. 1913 ) * February 12 &amp;ndash ; Julius Dresser , American writer ( d. 1893 ) * February 16 &amp;ndash ; Henry Brooks Adams , American historian ( d. 1918 ) * February 18 &amp;ndash ; Ernst Mach , Austrian physicist and philosopher ( d. 1916 ) * March 3 &amp;ndash ; George William Hill , American astronomer ( d. 1914 ) * March 11 &amp;ndash ; kuma Shigenobu , Japanese politician ( d. 1922 ) * April 3 &amp;ndash ; John Willis Menard , African-American politician ( d. 1893 ) * April 12 &amp;ndash ; John Shaw Billings , M.D. , American military and medical leader ( d. 1913 ) * April 16 &amp;ndash ; Martha McClellan Brown , American temperance movement leader ( d. 1916 ) * April 21 &amp;ndash ; John Muir , American ecologist ( d. 1914 ) * April 28 &amp;ndash ; Tobias Michael Carel Asser , Dutch jurist , recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize ( d. 1913 ) * May 10 &amp;ndash ; John Wilkes Booth , American actor and assassin ( , French statesman ( d. 1925 ) * June 14 &amp;ndash ; Yamagata Aritomo , Japanese Prime Minister ( d. 1922 ) . # July&amp;ndash ; December # * July 8 &amp;ndash ; Ferdinand von Zeppelin , German military officer and founder of the Zeppelin Company ( d. 1917 ) * September 2 &amp;ndash ; Liliuokalani of Hawai'i , last Queen of Hawaii ( d. 1917 ) * September 17 &amp;ndash ; Valeriano Weyler , Spanish general ( d. 1930 ) * September 27 &amp;ndash ; Lawrence Sullivan Ross , Confederate brigadier general , Texas governor , and president of Texas A&amp;M University ( d. 1898 ) * October 6 &amp;ndash ; Giuseppe Cesare Abba , Italian patriot and writer ( d. 1910 ) * October 25 &amp;ndash ; Georges Bizet , French composer ( d. 1875 ) * October 31 &amp;ndash ; King Luis I of Portugal ( d. 1889 ) * November 7 &amp;ndash ; Auguste Villiers de l'Isle-Adam , French writer ( d. 1889 ) * November 20 &amp;ndash ; Hedvig Raa-Winterhjelm , pioneer actor ( d. 1907 ) * December 3 &amp;ndash ; Cleveland Abbe , American Khedrup Gyatso , 11th Dalai Lama ( d. 1856 ) * December 20 &amp;ndash ; Edwin Abbott Abbott , theologian and author ( d. 1926 ) * December 30 &amp;ndash ; mile Loubet , 7th President of France ( d. 1929 ) # Date unknown # * Jamal-al-Din Afghani , teacher and writer ( d. 1897 ) # Deaths # # January&amp;ndash ; June # * January 3 &amp;ndash ; Prince Maximilian of Saxony ( b. 1759 ) * January 5 &amp;ndash ; Anthony Van Egmond , rebel leader in Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837 ( died in jail ) ( b. 1778 ) * January 12 &amp;ndash ; Joshua Humphreys , American naval architect ( b. 1751 ) * January 13 &amp;ndash ; John Scott , 1st Earl of Eldon , Lord Chancellor of Great Britain ( b. 1751 ) * February 21 &amp;ndash ; Silvestre de Sacy , linguist ( b. 1758 ) * February 24 &amp;ndash ; Christoph Johann von Medem , German courtier ( b. 1763 ) * March 13 &amp;ndash ; Poul Martin Mller , philosopher ( b. 1794 ) * March 16 &amp;ndash ; Nathaniel 3 &amp;ndash ; Franois Carlo Antommarchi , French physician ( b. 1780 ) * April 6 &amp;ndash ; Jos Bonifcio de Andrada e Silva , Brazilian statesman and naturalist ( b. 1763 ) * April 9 &amp;ndash ; Piet Uys , Voortrekker leader ( in battle ) ( b. 1797 ) * May 17 &amp;ndash ; Charles Maurice de Talleyrand , French diplomat ( b. 1754 ) * May 19 &amp;ndash ; Richard Colt Hoare , English archaeologist ( b. 1758 ) * May 23 &amp;ndash ; Jan Willem Janssens , Governor-General of the Dutch East Indies ( b. 1762 ) * June 14 &amp;ndash ; Maximilian von Montgelas , Bavarian statesman ( b. 1759 ) # July&amp;ndash ; December # * July 19 &amp;ndash ; Christmas Evans , preacher ( b. 1766 ) * August 1 &amp;ndash ; John Rodgers , American naval officer ( b. 1772 ) * August 17 &amp;ndash ; Lorenzo Da Ponte , librettist for Mozart ( b. 1749 ) * August 21 &amp;ndash ; Adelbert von Chamisso , German writer ( b. 1781 ) * September 1 &amp;ndash ; William Clark , American explorer ( , French chemist ( b. 1777 ) * October 1 &amp;ndash ; Charles Tennant , Scottish chemist and industrialist ( b. 1768 ) * October 3 &amp;ndash ; Black Hawk , Sauk Indian Chief and autobiographer ( b. 1767 ) * November 21 &amp;ndash ; Georges Mouton , count of Lobau , Marshal of France ( b. 1770 ) # Date unknown # * Francisco Gmez , president of El Salvador ( b. 1796 ) # References # 
 Depleted uranium ( DU ; also referred to in the past as Q-metal , depletalloy or D-38 ) is uranium with a lower content of the fissile isotope U-235 than natural uranium . : Depleted uranium possesses only 60% of the radioactivity of natural uranium , having been ' depleted ' of much of its most highly radioactive U <sup> 234 </sup> and U <sup> 235 </sup> isotopes . ( Natural uranium is about 0.72% U-235the fissile isotope , and the DU used by the U.S. Department of Defense contain less than 0.3% U-235 ) . Uses of DU take advantage of its very high density of 19.1 g/cm <sup> 3 </sup> ( 68.4% denser than lead ) . Civilian uses include counterweights in aircraft , radiation shielding in medical radiation therapy and industrial radiography equipment and containers used to transport radioactive materials . Military uses include defensive armor plating and armor-piercing projectiles . Most depleted uranium arises as a byproduct of the production of enriched uranium for use in nuclear reactors and in the manufacture of nuclear weapons . Enrichment processes generate uranium with a higher-than-natural concentration is the uranium isotope supporting the fission chain reaction ) with the bulk of the feed ending up as depleted uranium , in some cases with mass fractions of U-235 and U-234 less than a third of those in natural uranium . U-238 has a much longer halflife than the lighter isotopes , and DU therefore emits less alpha radiation than the same mass of natural uranium : the US Defense Department states DU used in US munitions has 60% of the radioactivity of natural uranium . Since the U-235 content of nuclear reactor fuel is reduced by fission , uranium recovered by nuclear reprocessing from spent nuclear reactor fuel made from natural uranium will have a lower-than-natural U-235 concentration . Such ' reactor-depleted ' material will have different isotopic ratios from enrichment byproduct DU , and can be distinguished from it by the presence of U-236 . Trace transuranics ( another indicator of the use of reprocessed material ) have been reported to be present in some US tank armor . The use of DU in munitions is controversial because of questions about potential long-term health effects . Normal functioning and numerous other systems can be affected by uranium exposure , because uranium is a toxic metal . It is only weakly radioactive because of its long radioactive half-life ( 4.468 billion years for uranium-238 , 700 million years for uranium-235 ) . The biological half-life ( the average time it takes for the human body to eliminate half the amount in the body ) for uranium is about 15 days . The aerosol or spallation frangible powder produced during impact and combustion of depleted uranium munitions can potentially contaminate wide areas around the impact sites , leading to possible inhalation by human beings . The actual level of acute and chronic toxicity of DU is also a point of medical controversy . Several studies using cultured cells and laboratory rodents suggest the possibility of leukemogenic , and of genetic , reproductive , and neurological effects from chronic exposure . A 2005 epidemiology review concluded : In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU . The World Health Organization , the directing and coordinating authority for health within , developmental , or carcinogenic effects have been reported in humans due to DU exposure . # History # Enriched uranium was first manufactured in the early 1940s when the United States and Britain began their nuclear weapons programs . Later in the decade , France and the Soviet Union began their nuclear weapons and nuclear power programs . It was at this time that depleted uranium was first stored as an unusable waste product ( uranium hexafluoride ) . There was some hope that the enrichment process would be improved and fissionable isotopes of U-235 could , at some future date , be extracted from the depleted uranium . This re-enrichment recovery of the residual uranium-235 contained in the depleted uranium is no longer a matter of the future : it has been practiced for several years . Also , it is possible to design civilian power-generating reactors using unenriched fuel , but only about 10%cite print In the 1970s , the Pentagon reported that the Soviet military had developed armor plating for Warsaw Pact tanks that NATO ammunition could not penetrate . The Pentagon began searching for material to ordnance researchers settled on depleted uranium . The US and NATO militaries used DU penetrator rounds in the 1991 Gulf War , the Bosnia war , While clearing a decades-old Hawaii firing range in 2005 , workers found depleted uranium fins from training rounds from the formerly classified Davy Crockett recoilless gun tactical battlefield nuclear delivery system from the 1960s and 1970s . These training rounds had been forgotten because they were used in a highly classified program and had been fired before DU had become an item of interest , more than 20 years before the Gulf War . # Production and availability # Natural uranium metal contains about 0.71% U-235 , 99.28% U-238 , and about 0.0054% U-234 . In order to produce enriched uranium , the process of isotope separation removes a substantial portion of the U-235 for use in nuclear power , weapons , or other uses . The remainder , ' ' depleted uranium ' ' , contains only 0.2% to 0.4% U-235 . Because natural uranium begins with such a low percentage of U-235 , enrichment produces large quantities of depleted uranium . For example kg of natural uranium , and leaves about 10.8 kg of depleted uranium with only 0.3% U-235 remaining . The Nuclear Regulatory Commission ( NRC ) defines ' ' depleted uranium ' ' as uranium with a percentage of the <sup> 235 </sup> U isotope that is less than 0.711% by weight ( see ) . The military specifications designate that the DU used by the U.S. Department of Defense ( DoD ) contain less than 0.3% <sup> 235 </sup> U ( AEPI , 1995 ) . In actuality , DoD uses only DU that contains approximately 0.2% <sup> 235 </sup> U ( AEPI , 1995 ) . Depleted Uranium is also produced by recycling ' spent ' nuclear fuel , in which case it contains traces of Pu and Np and has therefore been called ' dirty DU ' although the quantities are so small that they are considered to be not of serious radiological significance ( even ) by ECRR. # Uranium hexafluoride # Some depleted uranium produced is stored as uranium hexafluoride , a crystalline solid , ( D ) UF <sub> 6 </sub> , in steel cylinders Each cylinder holds up to 12.7 tonnes ( or 14 short tons ) of UF <sub> 6 </sub> . In the U.S. 560,000 tonnes of depleted UF <sub> 6 </sub> had accumulated by 1993 . In 2008 , 686,500 tonnes in 57,122 storage cylinders were located near Portsmouth , Ohio and Paducah , Kentucky . The storage of DUF <sub> 6 </sub> presents environmental , health , and safety risks because of its chemical instability . When UF <sub> 6 </sub> is exposed to water vapor in the air , it reacts with the moisture to produce UO <sub> 2 </sub> F <sub> 2 </sub> ( uranyl fluoride ) , a solid , and HF ( hydrogen fluoride ) , a gas , both of which are highly soluble and toxic . The uranyl fluoride solid acts to plug the leak , limiting further escape of depleted UF <sub> 6 </sub> . Release of the hydrogen fluoride gas to the atmosphere is also slowed by the plug formation . Storage cylinders are regularly inspected for signs of corrosion and leaks , and are repainted and repaired as necessary . A tenfold U.S. depleted uranium inventory into an asset worth $7.6 billion , assuming DOE re-enriches the tails . This estimate is based on February 2008 market price for uranium and enrichment services , and DOE 's access to sufficient uranium enrichment capacity . There have been several accidents involving uranium hexafluoride in the United States , including one in which 32 workers were exposed to a cloud of UF <sub> 6 </sub> and its reaction products . 1 person died , and while a few workers with higher exposure experienced short-term kidney damage ( e.g. , protein in the urine ) , none of them showed lasting damage from the exposure to uranium . The U.S. government has been converting DUF <sub> 6 </sub> to solid uranium oxides for use or disposal . Such disposal of the entire DUF <sub> 6 </sub> inventory could cost anywhere from $15 million to $450 million . : : : : : : : : World depleted uranium inventory : : : : : : : : : : <small> </small> # Military applications # Depleted uranium is very dense ; at 19,050 kg/m , it less dense than tungsten and gold , and 84% as dense as osmium or iridium , which are the densest known substances under standard ( i.e. , Earth-surface ) pressures . Consequently a DU projectile of given mass has a smaller diameter than an equivalent lead projectile , with less aerodynamic drag and deeper penetration due to a higher pressure at point of impact . DU projectile ordnance is often inherently incendiary because of its pyrophoric property . # Armor plate # Because of its high density , depleted uranium can also be used in tank armor , sandwiched between sheets of steel armor plate . For instance , some late-production M1A1HA and M1A2 Abrams tanks built after 1998 have DU reinforcement as part of the armor plating in the front of the hull and the front of the turret , and there is a program to upgrade the rest ( see Chobham armor ) . # Nuclear weapons # Depleted uranium is used as a tamper in fission bombs . # Ammunition # Most military use of depleted uranium has been as 30 mm caliber ordnance , primarily the 30 of the A-10 Thunderbolt II used by the United States Air Force . 25 mm DU rounds have been used in the M242 gun mounted on the U.S. Army 's Bradley Fighting Vehicle and the Marine Corp 's LAV-25 . The U.S. Marine Corps uses DU in the 25 mm PGU-20 round fired by the GAU-12 Equalizer cannon of the AV-8B Harrier , and also in the 20 mm M197 gun mounted on AH-1 Cobra helicopter gunships . The United States Navy 's Phalanx CIWS 's M61 Vulcan Gatling gun used 20 mm armor-piercing penetrator rounds with discarding plastic sabots made using depleted uranium , later changed to tungsten . Another use of depleted uranium is in kinetic energy penetrators , anti-armor rounds such as the 120 mm sabot rounds fired from the British Challenger 1 , Challenger 2 , M1A1 and M1A2 Abrams . Kinetic energy penetrator rounds consist of a long , relatively thin penetrator surrounded by a discarding sabot . Staballoys are metal alloys of depleted uranium with a very small proportion of other metals , usually titanium or molybdenum . One formulation has a composition of 99.25% titanium . Staballoys are approximately 1.67 times as dense as lead and are designed for use in kinetic energy penetrator armor-piercing ammunition . The US Army uses DU in an alloy with around 3.5% titanium . According to 2005 research , at least some of the most promising tungsten alloys that have been considered as replacement for depleted uranium in penetrator ammunitions , such as tungsten-cobalt or tungsten-nickel-cobalt alloys , also possess extreme carcinogenic properties , which by far exceed those ( confirmed or suspected ) of depleted uranium itself : 100% of rats implanted with a pellet of such alloys developed lethal rhabdomyosarcoma within a few weeks . Depleted uranium is favored for the penetrator because it is self-sharpening and pyrophoric . On impact with a hard target , such as an armored vehicle , the nose of the rod fractures in such a way that it remains sharp . The impact and subsequent release of heat energy causes it to disintegrate to dust and burn when it reaches air because of its pyrophoric properties . When a DU penetrator reaches the interior of an armored vehicle it catches fire and possibly causing the vehicle to explode . DU is used by the U.S. Army in 120 mm or 105 mm cannons employed on the M1 Abrams tank . The Russian military has used DU ammunition in tank main gun ammunition since the late 1970s , mostly for the 115 mm guns in the T-62 tank and the 125 mm guns in the T-64 , T-72 , T-80 , and T-90 tanks . The DU content in various ammunition is 180 g in 20 mm projectiles , 200 g in 25 mm ones , 280 g in 30 mm , 3.5 kg in 105 mm , and 4.5 kg in 120 mm penetrators . DU was used during the mid-1990s in the U.S. to make hand grenades , cluster bombs , and land mines , but those applications have been discontinued , according to Alliant Techsystems . The US Navy used DU in its 20 mm Phalanx CIWS guns , but switched in the late 1990s to armor-piercing tungsten . It is thought that between 17 and 20 countries have weapons incorporating depleted uranium in their arsenals . They include the , India , Turkey , Saudi Arabia , Israel , Bahrain , Egypt , Kuwait , Pakistan , Thailand , Iraq and Taiwan . Iran also has performed wide research on DU penetrators since 2001 . DU ammunition is manufactured in 18 countries . Only the US and the UK have acknowledged using DU weapons . In a three-week period of conflict in Iraq during 2003 it was estimated that over 1000 tons of depleted uranium munitions were used . # Legal status in weapons # In 1996 the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) gave an advisory opinion on the ' ' legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons ' ' . This made it clear , in paragraphs 54 , 55 and 56 , that international law on poisonous weaponsthe Second Hague Declaration of 29 July 1899 , Hague Convention IV of 18 October 1907 and the Geneva Protocol of 17 June 1925did not cover nuclear weapons , because their prime or exclusive use was not to poison or asphyxiate . This ICJ opinion was about nuclear weapons , but the sentence The terms have been ordinary sense as covering weapons whose prime , or even exclusive , effect is to poison or asphyxiate , also removes depleted uranium weaponry from coverage by the same treaties as their primary use is not to poison or asphyxiate , but to destroy materiel and kill soldiers through kinetic energy . The Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the United Nations Human Rights Commission , passed two motions the first in 1996 and the second in 1997 . They listed weapons of mass destruction , or weapons with indiscriminate effect , or of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering and urged all states to curb the production and the spread of such weapons . Included in the list was weaponry containing depleted uranium . The committee authorized a working paper , in the context of human rights and humanitarian norms , of the weapons . The requested UN working paper was delivered in 2002 by Y. K. J. Yeung Sik Yuen in accordance with Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights resolution 2001/36 . He argues that the use of DU the SubCommission , may breach one or more of the following treaties : the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Charter of the United Nations , the Genocide Convention , the United Nations Convention Against Torture , the Geneva Conventions including Protocol I , the Convention on Conventional Weapons of 1980 , and the Chemical Weapons Convention . Yeung Sik Yuen writes in Paragraph 133 under the title ' ' Legal compliance of weapons containing DU as a new weapon ' ' : Louise Arbour , chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia led a committee of staff lawyers to investigate possible treaty prohibitions against the use of DU in weapons . Their findings were that : # Requests for a moratorium on military use # Some states and the International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons , a coalition of more than 155 non-governmental organizations , have asked for a ban on the production and military use of depleted uranium weapons . The European Parliament has repeatedly passed resolutions requesting an immediate moratorium on the further use of depleted uranium ammunition , but France and Britain United Nations Security Council have consistently rejected calls for a ban , maintaining that its use continues to be legal , and that the health risks are unsubstantiated . In 2007 France , Britain , the Netherlands , and the Czech Republic voted against a United Nations General Assembly resolution to hold a debate in 2009 about the effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium . All other European Union nations voted in favour or abstained . The ambassador from the Netherlands explained his negative vote as being due to the reference in the preamble to the resolution to potential harmful effects of the use of depleted uranium munitions on human health and the environment which can not , in our view , be supported by conclusive scientific studies conducted by relevant international organizations . None of the other permanent members of the United Nations Security Council supported the resolution as China was absent for the vote , Russia abstained and the United States voted against the resolution . In September 2008 , and in response to the 2007 General Assembly resolution , the UN Secretary General International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) and World Health Organization ( WHO ) . The IAEA and WHO evidence differed little from previous statements on the issue . The report was largely split between states concerned about depleted uranium 's use , such as Finland , Cuba , Japan , Serbia , Argentina , and predominantly NATO members , who do not consider the use of depleted uranium munitions problematic . In December 2008 , 141 states supported a resolution requesting that three UN agencies : United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) , WHO and IAEA update their research on the impact of uranium munitions by late 2010 to coincide with the General Assembly 's 65th Session , four voted against , 34 abstained and 13 were absent As before Britain and France voted against the resolution . All other European Union nations voted in favour or abstained : the Netherlands , which voted against a resolution in 2007 , voted in favour , as did Finland and Norway , both of which had abstained in 2007 , while the Czech Republic , which voted against the resolution in against the resolution were Israel and the United States ( both of which voted against in 2007 ) , while as before China was absent for the vote , and Russia abstained . On June 21 , 2009 , Belgium became the first country in the world to ban : inert ammunition and armour that contains depleted uranium or any other industrially manufactured uranium . The move followed a unanimous parliamentary vote on the issue on 22 March 2007 . The text of the 2007 law allowed for two years to pass until it came into force . In April 2009 , the Belgian Senate voted unanimously to restrict investments by Belgian banks into the manufacturers of depleted uranium weapons . In September 2009 the Latin American Parliament passed a resolution calling for a regional moratorium on the use , production and procurement of uranium weapons . It also called on the Parlatino 's members to work towards an international uranium weapons treaty . In April 2011 the Congress of Costa Rica passed a law prohibiting uranium weapons in its territories , becoming the second country in the world to do bill seeking to outlaw depleted uranium weapons , but it lapsed before approval by the Dil # Civilian applications # Depleted uranium has a very high density and is primarily used as shielding material for other radioactive material , and as ballast . Examples include sailboat keels , as counterweights and as shielding in industrial radiography cameras . # Shielding in industrial radiography cameras # Industrial radiography cameras include a very high activity gamma radiation source ( typically Ir-192 with an activity above 10 TBq ) . Depleted uranium is often used in the cameras as a shield to protect individuals from the gamma source . Typically the uranium shield is supported and enclosed in polyurethane foam for thermal , mechanical and oxidation protection . and ZEUS detectors ) in due to its high density and natural radioactivity. # Health considerations # Normal functioning of the kidney , brain , liver , heart , and numerous other systems can be affected by uranium exposure because , in addition to being weakly radioactive , uranium is a toxic metal , If DU particles do enter an individual , the type of danger depend on the solubility of the particles . . Briefly , inhaled and insoluble means the DU particles will stick around in the lungs and attendant lymph nodes , presenting a radiological risk ; highly soluble means those particles are off to the kidneys , where toxicity is the issue . In military conflicts involving DU munitions , the major concern is inhalation of DU particles in aerosols arising from the impacts of DU-enhanced projectiles with their targets . When depleted uranium munitions penetrate armor or burn , they create depleted uranium oxides in the form of dust that can be inhaled or contaminate wounds . The Institute of Nuclear Technology-Radiation Protection of Attiki , Greece , has noted that the aerosol produced during impact and combustion of depleted uranium munitions can potentially contaminate wide areas around the impact sites or can be inhaled by civilians and military personnel . The utilisation of DU in incendiary ammunition is controversial because of potential adverse health effects and its release into the environment . In early 2004 , the UK Pensions Appeal Tribunal Service attributed birth defect claims from a February 1991 Gulf a 2005 epidemiology review concluded : In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU . Studies using cultured cells and laboratory rodents continue to suggest the possibility of leukemogenic , genetic , reproductive , and neurological effects from chronic exposure . # Chemical toxicity # The chemical toxicity of depleted uranium is about a million times greater ' ' in vitro ' ' than its radiological hazard , with the kidney considered to be the main target organ . . Health effects of DU are determined by factors such as the extent of exposure and whether it was internal or external . Three main pathways exist by which internalization of uranium may occur : inhalation , ingestion , and embedded fragments or shrapnel contamination . Properties such as phase ( e.g. particulate or gaseous ) , oxidation state ( e.g. metallic or ceramic ) , and the solubility of uranium and its compounds influence their absorption , distribution , translocation , elimination and the resulting toxicity . For example , metallic uranium is less toxic compared to hexavalent of 2004 Review Information Regarding Uranium Toxicity ! Body system ! Human studies ! Animal studies ! ' ' In vitro ' ' Uranium is pyrophoric when finely divided . It will corrode under the influence of air and water producing insoluble uranium(IV) and soluble uranium ( VI ) salts . Soluble uranium salts are toxic . Uranium slowly accumulates in several organs , such as the liver , spleen , and kidneys . The World Health Organization has established a daily tolerated intake of soluble uranium salts for the general public of 0.5 g/kg body weight , or 35 g for a 70 kg adult . Epidemiological studies and toxicological tests on laboratory animals point to it as being immunotoxic , and thus could not affect populations more than a few kilometers from target areas , and that such particles , if inhaled , would remain undissolved in the lung for a great length of time and thus could be detected in urine . Violently burning uranium droplets produce a gaseous vapor comprising about half of the uranium in their original mass . Uranyl ion contamination in uranium oxides has Approximately 90 micrograms of natural uranium , on average , exist in the human body as a result of normal intake of water , food and air . Most is in the skeleton . The biochemistry of depleted uranium is the same as natural uranium . # Radiological hazards # The primary radiation danger from pure depleted uranium is due to alpha particles , which do not travel far through air , and do not penetrate clothing . However , in a matter of a month or so , a sample of pure depleted uranium will generate small amounts of thorium-234 and protactinium-234 , which emit the more penetrating beta particles at almost the same rate as the uranium emits alpha rays . This is because uranium-238 decays directly to thorium-234 , which with a half-life of 24 days decays to protactinium-234 , which in turn decays in a matter of hours to the long-lived uranium-234 . A quasi-steady state is therefore reached within a few multiples of 24 days . Available evidence suggests that the radiation risk is small relative to the chemical hazard . Surveying the veteran-related evidence pertaining ' ' BMJ ' ' concluded it was not possible to justify claims of radiation-induced lung cancer and leukaemia in veterans of that conflict . While agreeing with the editorial 's conclusion , a reply noted that its finding in the negative was guaranteed , given that global dose estimates or results of mathematical modelling are too inaccurate to be used as dose values for an individual veteran , and that , as of April 2001 , no practical method of measuring the expected small doses that each individual veteran would receive had been suggested . . Mould 's suggestion was electron paramagnetic resonance dosimetry using tooth enamel . He also wrote that the US National Institute of Standards and Technology was able , using this method , to measure doses as low as 20 mSv , and that , if it were asked to , the NIST would be able to get involved , meaning at least one centre could help undertake a screening programme for veterans . The author of the reply , a radiation scientist , went on to suggest a method that had been used several times the widespread use of DU in the Iraq War , at least a year after the conflict began , testing for UK troops was still only in the discussion phase . , which found that perhaps a quarter of all UK troops would have been interested in undergoing DU-related monitoring , although the desire for DU screening is more closely linked to current health status rather than plausible exposure to DU . <p> Confusingly , reports that testing is now available to all troops that served in Iraq , and does not say if this is testing la Mould . The Royal Society DU Working Group concluded in 2002 that there were very low health risks associated with the use of depleted uranium , though also ventured that , in extreme conditions and under worst-case assumptions lung and kidney damage could occur , and that in worst-case scenarios high local levels of uranium could occur in food or water that could have adverse effects on the kidney . In 2003 , the Royal Society issued another urgent call to investigate the actual health and environmental impact of depleted uranium . The found no elevated risks of cancer generally , nor of any specific cancers in particular , though recommended follow up studies . According to the World Health Organization , a radiation dose from it would be about 60% of that from purified natural uranium with the same mass ; the radiological dangers are lower due to its longer half-life and the removal of the more radioactive isotopes. # Gulf War syndrome and soldier complaints # Since 1991 , the year the Gulf War ended , veterans and their families voiced concern about subsequent health problems . In 1999 , assessment of the first 1,000 veterans involved in the Ministry of Defence 's Gulf War medical assessment programme found no evidence of a single illness , physical or mental , that would explain the pattern of symptoms observed in the group . Nevertheless , in 1999 , MEDACT petitioned for the WHO to conduct an investigation into illnesses in veterans and Iraqi civilians . A major 2006 review of peer-reviewed literature by a US Institute of Medicine committee concluded that , because the symptoms vary greatly among individuals , they do not though their report conceded that the lack of objective pre-deployment health data meant definitive conclusions were effectively impossible . . The quote is of Lynn Goldman , who chaired the IOM committee that carried out the review . <p> notes that despite clear evidence of an increase in symptom burden and a decrease in well being among Gulf War veterans , exhaustive clinical and laboratory based scientific research has failed to document many reproducible biomedical abnormalities in this group . Likewise , there has been no evidence of an increase in disease related mortality . Simon Wessely praised the IOM 's review , and noted that despite its central conclusion that no novel syndrome existed , its other findings made it equally clear that service in the Gulf war did aversely affect health in some personnel . . The quote is of Wessely himself . Aside from the lack of baseline data to guide analysis of the veterans ' postwar health , because no detailed health screening was carried out when the veterans entered service , another major stumbling block with some studies , like the thousand-veteran one , is that , making general conclusions impossible . Increased rates of immune system disorders and other wide-ranging symptoms , including chronic pain , fatigue and memory loss , have been reported in over one quarter of combat veterans of the 1991 Gulf War . Combustion products from depleted uranium munitions are being considered as one of the potential causes by the Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans ' Illnesses , as DU was used in 30 mm and 25 mm cannon rounds on a large scale for the first time in the Gulf War . Veterans of the conflicts in the Persian Gulf , Bosnia and Kosovo have been found to have up to 14 times the usual level of chromosome abnormalities in their genes . Serum-soluble genotoxic teratogens produce congenital disorders , and in white blood cells causes immune system damage . Human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in the offspring of persons exposed to DU . After examination of children 's medical records two years later , the birth defect rate increased by more than 20% : In early 2004 , the UK Pensions Appeal Gulf War combat veteran to depleted uranium poisoning . Looking at the risk of children of UK Gulf War veterans suffering genetic diseases such as congenital malformations , commonly called birth defects , one study found that the overall risk of any malformation was 50% higher in Gulf War veterans as compared to other veterans . The U.S. Army has commissioned ongoing research into potential risks of depleted uranium and other projectile weapon materials like tungsten , which the U.S. Navy has used in place of DU since 1993 . Studies by the U.S. Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute conclude that moderate exposures to either depleted uranium or uranium present a significant toxicological threat . In 2003 Professor Brian Spratt FRS , chairman of the Royal Society 's working group on depleted uranium , said : The question of who carries out the initial monitoring and clean-up is a political rather than scientific question , and the coalition needs to acknowledge that depleted uranium is a potential hazard and make in-roads into tackling it by being open about where and how much depleted uranium has been deployed . A 2008 review MEDLINE through to the end of 2007 , including multiple cohort studies of veterans , found no consistent evidence of excess risks of neoplasms that could have some link to DU , and that the overall incidence of cancers is not increased in the cohort studies of Gulf war and Balkans veterans . Though a more comprehensive assessment is possible , a 2011 update on a cancer scare regarding Italian soldiers who had served in the Balkans found lower than expected incidence rates for all cancers , a finding consistent with lacking evidence of an increased cancer incidence among troops of other countries deployed in the areas of Iraq , Bosnia , and Kosovo , where armour-penetrating depleted uranium shells have been used . One particular subgroup of veterans that may be at higher risk comprises those who have internally retained fragments of DU from shrapnel wounds . A laboratory study on rats produced by the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute showed that , after a study period of 6 months , rats treated with depleted uranium coming from implanted pellets , comparable to the average levels in the urine of a significant tendency to lose weight with respect to the control group . Substantial amounts of uranium were accumulating in their brains and central nervous systems , and showed a significant reduction of neuronal activity in the hippocampus in response to external stimuli . The conclusions of the study show that brain damage from chronic uranium intoxication is possible at lower doses than previously thought . Results from computer-based neurocognitive tests performed in 1997 showed an association between uranium in the urine and problematic performance on automated tests assessing performance efficiency and accuracy . # Iraqi population # Since 2001 , medical personnel at the Basra hospital in southern Iraq have reported a sharp increase in the incidence of child leukemia and genetic malformation among babies born in the decade following the Gulf War . Iraqi doctors attributed these malformations to possible long-term effects of DU , an opinion that was echoed by several newspapers . In 2004 , Iraq had the highest mortality rate due to leukemia of any country . In 2003 , the Royal Society called for Western militaries to disclose where and how much DU they had , studies could be undertaken out in affected areas . . The International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons ( ICBUW ) likewise urged that an epidemiological study be made in the Basra region , as asked for by Iraqi doctors , but no peer-reviewed study has yet been undertaken in Basra . A medical survey , Cancer , Infant Mortality and Birth Sex Ratio in Fallujah , Iraq 20052009 published in July 2010 , states that the increases in cancer and birth defectsare alarmingly high and that infant mortality 2009/2010 has reached 13.6% . The group compares the dramatic increase , five years after the actual war 2004 , or exposure , with the lymphoma Italian peacekeepers developed after the Balkan wars , and the increased cancer risk in certain parts of Sweden due to the Chernobyl fallout . The origin and time of introduction of the carcinogenic agent causing the genetic stress the group will address in a separate report . The report mentions depleted uranium as one potentially relevant exposure but makes no conclusions on the source . Four studies in the second half of 2012one of which described genetic damage in any population ever studied renewed calls for the US and UK to investigate the possible links between their military assault on the city in 2004 and the explosion in deformities , cancers , and other serious health problems , even though no depleted uranium was found in soil samples taken from Fallujah. # The Balkans # In 2001 , the World Health Organization reported that data from Kosovo was inconclusive and called for further studies . A 2003 study by the United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) in Bosnia and Herzegovina stated that low levels of contaminate were found in drinking water and air particulate at DU penetrator impact points . The levels were stated as not a cause for alarm . Yet , Pekka Haavisto , chairman of the UNEP DU projects stated , The findings of this study stress again the importance of appropriate clean-up and civil protection measures in a post-conflict situation . A team of Italian scientists from the University of Siena reported in 2005 that although DU was clearly added to the soil in the study area , the phenomenon was very natural range of the element in soils . Moreover , the absolute uranium concentrations indicate that there was no contamination of the earthworm species studied . # Contamination as a result of the Afghan War # The Canadian Uranium Medical Research Centre obtained urine samples from bombed civilian areas in Jalalabad that showed concentrations of 80400 ng/L of undepleted uranium , far higher than the typical concentration in the British population of 5 ng/L. # Studies indicating negligible effects # Studies in 2005 and earlier have concluded that DU ammunition has no measurable detrimental health effects . A 1999 literature review conducted by the Rand Corporation stated : No evidence is documented in the literature of cancer or any other negative health effect related to the radiation received from exposure to depleted or natural uranium , whether inhaled or ingested , even at very high doses , and a RAND report authored by the U.S. Defense department undersecretary charged with evaluating DU hazards considered the debate to be more political than scientific . A 2001 oncology study concluded that the present scientific consensus is that DU exposure to humans , in to give rise to cancer induction . Former NATO Secretary General Lord Robertson stated in 2001 that the existing medical consensus is clear . The hazard from depleted uranium is both very limited , and limited to very specific circumstances . A 2002 study from the Australian defense ministry concluded that there has been no established increase in mortality or morbidity in workers exposed to uranium in uranium processing industries .. studies of Gulf War veterans show that , in those who have retained fragments of depleted uranium following combat related injury , it has been possible to detect elevated urinary uranium levels , but no kidney toxicity or other adverse health effects related to depleted uranium after a decade of follow-up . Pier Roberto Danesi , then-director of the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) Seibersdorf +Laboratory , stated in 2002 that There is a consensus now that DU does not represent a health threat . A 2005 study by Sandia National Laboratories ' Al Marshall used mathematical models to analyze potential health effects associated with accidental exposure to depleted uranium during the 1991 Gulf War . Marshall 's exposure are not supported by his analysis nor by veteran medical statistics . Marshall also examined possible genetic effects due to radiation from depleted uranium . Chemical effects , including potential reproductive issues , associated with depleted uranium exposure were discussed in some detail in a subsequent journal paper . # Atmospheric contamination as a result of military actions # Elevated radiation levels consistent with very low level atmospheric depleted uranium contamination have been found in air samples taken by the UK Atomic Weapons Establishment at several monitoring sites in Britain . These elevated readings appear to coincide with Operation Anaconda in Afghanistan , and the Shock and Awe bombing campaign at the start of the Second Gulf War . # Other contamination cases # On October 4 , 1992 , an El Al Boeing 747-F cargo aircraft Flight 1862 , crashed into an apartment building in Amsterdam . Local residents and rescue workers complained of various unexplained health issues which were being attributed to the release of hazardous materials during the crash and subsequent fires . Authorities conducted an epidemiological study in 2000 of those believed to be affected by evidence to link depleted uranium ( used as counterbalance weights on the elevators of the plane ) to any of the reported health complaints . # Safety and environmental issues # About 95% of the depleted uranium produced until now is stored as uranium hexafluoride , ( D ) UF <sub> 6 </sub> , in steel cylinders in open air yards close to enrichment plants . Each cylinder contains up to 12.7 tonnes ( or 14 US tons ) of UF <sub> 6 </sub> . In the U.S. alone , 560,000 tonnes of depleted UF <sub> 6 </sub> had accumulated by 1993 . In 2005 , 686,500 tonnes in 57,122 storage cylinders were located near Portsmouth , Ohio , Oak Ridge , Tennessee , and Paducah , Kentucky. , The long-term storage of DUF <sub> 6 </sub> presents environmental , health , and safety risks because of its chemical instability . When UF <sub> 6 </sub> is exposed to moist air , it reacts with the water in the air and produces UO <sub> 2 </sub> F <sub> 2 </sub> ( uranyl fluoride ) and HF ( hydrogen fluoride ) , cylinders must be regularly inspected for signs of corrosion and leaks . The estimated lifetime of the steel cylinders is measured in decades . There have been several accidents involving uranium hexafluoride in the United States . The vulnerability of DUF <sub> 6 </sub> storage cylinders to terrorist attack is apparently not the subject of public reports . However , the U.S. government has been converting DUF <sub> 6 </sub> to solid uranium oxides for disposal . Disposing of the whole DUF <sub> 6 </sub> inventory could cost anywhere from 15 to 450 million dollars . 
 In the 1980s the telecommunications industry expected that digital services would follow much the same pattern as voice services did on the public switched telephone network , and conceived an end-to-end circuit switched services , known as Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network ( B-ISDN ) . Before B-ISDN , the original ISDN attempted to substitute the analog telephone system with a digital system which was appropriate for both voice and non-voice traffic . Obtaining worldwide agreement on the basic rate interface standard was expected to lead to a large user demand for ISDN equipment , hence leading to mass production and inexpensive ISDN chips . However , the standardization process took years while computer network technology moved rapidly . Once the ISDN standard was finally agreed upon and products were available , it was already obsolete . For home use the largest demand for new services was video and voice transfer , but the ISDN basic rate lacks the necessary channel capacity . For business , ISDN 's 64 kbit/s data rate compared unfavorably to 10 Mbit/s local area networks such as Ethernet . This led to introduction the term had a meaning in physics and engineering ( similar to wideband ) , the CCITT defined it as : Qualifying a service or system requiring transmission channels capable of supporting rates greater than the primary rate referring to the primary rate which ranged from about 1.5 to 2 Mbit/s . Services envisioned included video telephone and video conferencing . Technical papers were published in early 1988 . Standards were issued by the Comit Consultatif International Tlphonique et Tlgraphique ( CCITT , now known as ITU-T ) , and called Recommendations . They included G.707 to G.709 , and I.121 which defined the principal aspects of B-ISDN , with many others following through the 1990s . The designated technology for B-ISDN was Asynchronous Transfer Mode ( ATM ) , which was intended to carry both synchronous voice and asynchronous data services on the same transport . The B-ISDN vision has been overtaken by other disruptive technologies used in the Internet . The ATM technology survived as a low-level layer in most Digital subscriber line ( DSL ) technologies , and as a payload type in some wireless technologies such as any digital Internet access service . 
 NOTOC Year 1344 ( MCCCXLIV ) was a leap year starting on Thursday ( link will display the full calendar ) of the Julian calendar . # Events # <onlyinclude> # January&amp;ndash ; December # * March 26 &amp;ndash ; The Siege of Algeciras , one of the first European military engagements where gunpowder was used , comes to an end . * December 15 &amp;ndash ; Seven-year-old Erik Magnusson , the eldest son of king Magnus V of Sweden , is appointed heir to the Swedish throne , even though Sweden , at this time , is an elective monarchy . # Date unknown # * King Edward III of England introduces three new gold coins , the florin , leopard , and helm . Unfortunately the amount of gold in the coins does not match their value of 6 shillings , 3 shillings , and 1 shilling and sixpence , so they have to be withdrawn and mostly melted down by August of this year . * Vesse , the rebel King of Saaremaa Island in Estonia , is hanged . * Bablake School was founded Compagnia dei Bardi in Florence goes bankrupt , along with the Peruzzi Bank and the Acciaiuoli Bank . * Famine in China . * King Peter IV of Aragon defeats and deposes his cousin , James III of Majorca , thereby absorbing the Balearic Kingdom of Majorca into the Crown of Aragon. </onlyinclude> # Births # * February 9 &amp;ndash ; Meinhard III , Count of Tyrol ( d. 1363 ) * September 18 &amp;ndash ; Marie Valois , daughter of King John II of France ( d. 1404 ) * October 10 &amp;ndash ; Mary Plantagenet , daughter of King Edward III of England ( d. 1362 ) * ' ' date unknown ' ' ** Beatrix of Bavaria , queen consort of Sweden ( d. 1359 ) ** Azzo X d'Este , condottiero ( d. 1415 ) ** John I , Count of La Marche ( d. 1393 ) ** Parameswara , Malay Srivijayan prince ( d. 1424 ) # Deaths # * January 11 &amp;ndash ; Thomas Charlton , bishop and Lord High Treasurer of England * January 30 &amp;ndash ; William Montacute , 1st Earl of Salisbury of Armenia * July 11 &amp;ndash ; Ulrich III , Count of Wrttemberg ( b. c. 1286 ) * ' ' date unknown ' ' ** Gersonides , French rabbi and mathematician ( b. 1288 ) ** Raoul I of Brienne , Count of Eu ** Wajih ad-Din Mas'ud , leader of the Sarbadars of Sabzewar * ' ' probable ' ' &amp;ndash ; Simone Martini , Sienese painter ( b. 1284 ) # References # 
 The United States presidential election of 1844 was the 15th quadrennial presidential election , held from Friday , November 1 , to Wednesday , December 4 , 1844 . Democrat James K. Polk defeated Whig Henry Clay in a close contest that turned on the controversial issue of slavery expansion through the annexation of the Republic of Texas . The general election of 1844 took place in the midst of increasingly bitter congressional disputes over anti-slavery agitation , raising questions as to whether free-soil and slave-soil interests could coexist within a democratic republic . The campaign themes arose in direct response to incumbent President John Tyler 's pursuit of Texas annexation as a slave state so as to undermine the unity of the Whig and Democratic parties in his bid to retain the White House . The Whig Party nominee Henry Clay adopted an anti-annexation platform on the principle of preserving North-South sectional unity and to avoid war by respecting Mexico 's claims to Texas . Clay 's attempts to finesse his anti-annexation position on Texas alienated many voters in the South and West where annexation support was to the anti-slavery Liberty Party . Democrat Martin Van Buren , his party 's presumptive presidential contender , was ousted at the Democratic National Convention , failing to meet the demands of southern Democrat expansionists for a leader favoring the immediate acquisition of Texas . Democrat James K. Polk emerged as America 's first dark horse nominee running on a platform that embraced America 's popular commitment to territorial expansionism , referred to as Manifest Destiny . Polk successfully linked the US-British boundary dispute over the partition of Oregon Territory , with the divisive Texas annexation debate . In doing so , the Democratic Party nominee united the anti-slavery Northern expansionists , who demanded Oregon as free-soil , with pro-slavery Southern expansionists , who insisted on acquiring Texas as a slave state . In doing so , Polk narrowly outpolled the Whig Party nominee Clay by thirty-eight thousand votes . Party alliances were shaken by the Texas Controversy , but partisan loyalties among Congressional Democrats were rallied sufficiently in the aftermath of Polk 's victory to pass a joint House-Senate resolution on Texas annexation . Texas would enter the Union as presidential election to be held on different days in different states . Starting with the presidential election of 1848 , all states held the election on the same date in November . It is also the only presidential election in which the winner , Polk , lost both his birth state of North Carolina and his state of residence , Tennessee . # Background # # Gag Rule and Texas annexation controversies # Whigs and Democrats embarked upon their campaigns during the climax of the congressional Gag Rule controversies in 1844 , during which Southern Congressmen had suppressed northern petitions to end the slave trade in the District of Columbia . Anti-annexation petitions to Congress sent from northern anti-slavery forces , including state legislatures had been similarly suppressed . Intraparty sectional compromises and maneuvering on slavery politics during these divisive debates had placed significant strain on the northern and southern wings that comprised each political organization . The question as to whether the institution of slavery and its aristocratic principles of social authority were compatible with democratic republicanism was becoming a permanent issue in national politics . In 1836 , a declared its independence to form the Republic of Texas . Texans , mostly white immigrants from the Deep South , many of whom owned slaves , sought to bring their republic into the Union as a state . During the eight years since the Texas republic had declared its independence from Mexico , the subject of annexing Texas to the United States was shunned by both major American political parties . Though recognizing Texas sovereignty , Presidents Andrew Jackson ( 1829 1837 ) and Martin Van Buren ( 1837 1841 ) would decline to pursue annexation . The prospect of bringing another slave state into the Union was fraught with problems . Both major parties the Democrats and Whigs viewed Texas statehood as not worth a foreign war with Mexico or the sectional combat that annexation would provoke in the United States . # Tyler-Texas Treaty # The incumbent US President John Tyler of Virginia , formerly Vice-President , had ascended to the White House upon the death of William Henry Harrison in 1841 . Tyler , a Whig in name only , emerged as a states ' rights advocate committed . Vetoing the Whig domestic legislative agenda , he was expelled from his own party on September 13 , 1841 . Politically isolated but unencumbered by party restraints , Tyler aligned himself with a small faction of Texas annexationists in a bid for reelection in 1844 . Tyler became convinced that Great Britain had encouraged a Texas-Mexico rapprochement that might lead to slave emancipation in the Texas republic . Accordingly , he directed Secretary of State Abel P. Upshur of Virginia to initiate , then relentlessly pursued , secret annexation talks with Texas minister to the United States Isaac Van Zandt , beginning on October 16 , 1843 . Tyler submitted his Texas-US treaty for annexation to the US Senate , delivered April 22 , 1844 , where a two-thirds majority was required for ratification . The newly appointed Secretary of State John C. Calhoun of South Carolina ( assuming his post March 29 , 1844 ) included a document known as the Packenham Letter with the Tyler bill that was calculated to inject a sense of crisis in Southern Democrats of the Deep South . In it , he characterized as an emergency measure necessary to safeguard the peculiar institution in the United States . In doing so , Tyler and Calhoun sought to unite the South in a crusade that would present the North with an ultimatum : support Texas annexation or lose the South . Anti-slavery Whigs considered Texas annexation particularly egregious since Mexico had outlawed slavery in Coahuila y Tejas in 1829 , before Texas independence had been declared . Historian William Lee Miller points out that the significance of acquiring Texas ' annexing ' it now became quite different after the Mexican government abolished slavery in 1829 , after which the expansionist impulse included an overt reference to slavery . The 1844 presidential campaigns evolved within the context of this struggle over Texas annexation , explicitly tied to the question of slavery expansion and national security . All candidates in 1844 presidential election had to declare a position on this explosive issue . # Nominations # # Whig Party convention and campaign # Whig candidates Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky , effectively the leader of the Whig Party since its inception in 1834 was selected as the , Maryland on May 1 , 1844 . Clay , a slaveholder , presided over a party in which its Southern wing was sufficiently committed to the national platform to put partisan loyalties above slavery expansionist proposals that might undermine its North-South alliance . Whigs felt confident that Clay could duplicate Harrison 's landslide victory of 1840 against any opposition candidate . Southern Whigs feared that , with the acquisition of Texas ' fertile lands would produce a huge market for slave labor , inflating the price of slaves and deflating land values in their home states . Northern Whigs feared that Texas statehood would initiate the opening of a vast Empire for Slavery . Two weeks before the Whig convention in Baltimore , in reaction to Calhoun 's Packenham Letter , Clay issued a document known as the Raleigh Letter ( issued April 17 , 1844 ) presenting his views on Texas to his fellow southern Whigs . In it , he flatly denounced the Tyler annexation bill and predicted that its passage would provoke a war with Mexico , whose government had never recognized Texas independence . Clay underlined , he would block annexation in the event that substantial sectional opposition existed anywhere in the United States . The Whig party leadership was acutely aware that any proslavery legislation advanced by its southern wing would alienate its anti-slavery northern wing and cripple the party in the general election . In order to preserve their party , Whigs would need to stand squarely against acquiring a new slave state . As such , Whigs were content to restrict their 1844 campaign platform to less divisive issues such as internal improvements and national finance . Whigs picked Theodore Frelinghuysen of New Jersey the Christian Statesman as Clay 's running mate . An advocate of colonization of emancipated slaves , he was acceptable to southern Whigs as an opponent of the abolitionists . His pious reputation balanced Clay 's image as a slave-holding , hard-drinking duelist . Their party slogan was the bland Hurray , Hurray , the Country 's Risin ' Vote for Clay and Frelinghuysen ! # #Henry Clay 's Alabama letter# # On July 27 , 1844 , Henry Clay , in the midst of his campaign against James K. Letter . In it , he counseled his Whig constituency to regard Texas annexation and statehood as merely a short phase in the decline of slavery in the United States , rather than a long term advance for the Slavepower . Clay qualified his stance on Texas annexation , declaring no personal objection to the annexation of the republic . He would move back to his original orientation in September 1844 . Northern Whigs expressed outrage at any dtente with the Slavepower . Failing to evince single-mindedness , they accused him of eqivocating on Texas annexation . Clay 's central position , however , had not altered : no annexation without northern acquiescence . Clay 's commitment brought Southern Whigs under extreme pressure in their home states and congressional districts , threatening to tarnish their loyalty to slavery credentials . # Whig Party campaign tactics # Historian Sean Wilentz describes some the Whig campaign tactics : The Liberty Party added to the confusion ... Clay became the object of nasty abolitionist attacks . One notorious handbill , widely reprinted , by an abolitionist minister Abel J. Brown # Democratic Party campaign and chief architect of the Jacksonian democracy was presumptive Democratic presidential contender in the spring of 1844 . With Calhoun withdrawing his bid for the presidency in January 1844 , the campaign was expected to focus on domestic issues . All this changed with the Tyler treaty . Van Buren regarded the Tyler annexation measure as an attempt to sabotage his bid for the White House by exacerbating the already strained Democratic North-South alliance regarding slavery expansion . Calhoun 's Packenham Letter would serve to spur Democrats of the South to the task of forcing the Northern wing of the party to submit to Texas annexation , despite the high risk of aggressively injecting slavery ' ' into ' ' their political campaign over Texas . # #Van Buren 's Hammet letter# # Van Buren realized that accommodating slavery expansionists in the South would open the Northern Democrats to withering charges of appeasement to the Slavepower from the strongly anti-annexation Northern Whigs and some Democrats . He crafted an emphatically anti-Texas position that temporized with expansionist southern Democrats , laying out a highly conditional scenario that delayed Texas annexation indefinitely . ( penned April 20 ) , he counseled his party to reject Texas under a Tyler administration . Furthermore , annexation of Texas as a territory would proceed , tentatively , under a Van Buren administration , only when the American public had been consulted on the matter and Mexico 's cooperation had been pursued to avoid an unnecessary war . A military option might be advanced if a groundswell of popular support arose for Texas , certified with a Congressional mandate . In these respects , Martin Van Buren differed from Henry Clay , who would never tolerate annexation without Mexico 's assent . With the publication of Clay 's Raleigh Letter and Van Buren 's Hammett Letter , Van Burenite Democrats hoped that their candidate 's posture on Texas would leave southern pro-annexationists with exactly one choice for US president : Martin Van Buren . In this , they misapprehended the political situation . Tyler and the southern pro-annexationists posed a potentially far greater threat then Clay , in that the Tyler-Calhoun treaty would put immense pressure on the northern Democrats to comply with southern Democrats demands for Texas Deep South extremists who had responded favorably to Calhoun 's Pakenham Letter . A minority phlanx of the southern Democrat leadership remained obdurate that Northern Democratic legislators would , when exposed to sufficient southern pressure , ignore their constituents opposition to slavery expansion and unite in support of Texas annexation . The extent to which Southern Democrat support for Martin Van Buren had eroded over Texas annexation crisis became evident when Van Buren 's southern counterpart in the rise of the Democratic Party , Thomas Ritchie of the ' ' Richmond Enquirer ' ' , terminated their 20-year political alliance in favor of immediate annexation . # #Andrew Jackson# # Secretary of State John C. Calhoun , a political outsider like John Tyler , gained significant credibility when his former nemesis , ex-President Andrew Jackson ( 1829-1837 ) publicly announced his support for immediate Texas annexation in May 1844 . Old Hickory had facilitated Tyler 's Texas negotiations in February 1844 by reassuring President of the Texas Republic Sam Houston that the US Senate ratification of the Tyler treaty was likely . As the Senate debated the Tyler treaty , Jackson be respected , and any delay would result in a British balkanized Texas Republic , promoting slave emancipation and posing a foreign military threat to the southwest United States . The former military hero went further , urging all Jacksonian Democrats to block Martin Van Buren from the party ticket and seek a Democratic presidential candidate fully committed to the immediate annexation of Texas . In doing so , Jackson abandoned the Jeffersonian-Jacksonian formula that had characterized his party since the 1820s which had required its Northern and Southern wings to compromise on constitutional slavery disputes . Texas was fracturing Van Buren 's support among Democrats and would derail his bid for President of the United States # Democratic Party convention # Democratic candidates **20;9576;gallery **29;9598;TOOLONG Governor James K. Polk of Tennessee **30;9629;TOOLONG President Martin Van Buren of New York **35;9661;TOOLONG Lewis Cass of Michigan **36;9698;TOOLONG Vice President Richard M. Johnson of Kentucky Image:JamesBuchanan crop.jpgSenator James Buchanan of Pennsylvania **31;9736;TOOLONG of State John C. Calhoun of South Carolina </gallery> In 1840 , the Democratic Party Convention had adopted a simple majority principle for nominee selection . Northern Democrat Van Burenites arrived expectation that , possessing a majority of the delegates , they would quickly secure the candidacy for their man . Early in proceedings , Senator Robert J. Walker of Mississippi , in cooperation with Senator James Buchanan of Pennsylvania , called for the reinstatement of the traditional 1832 and 1834 convention rule requiring a two-thirds majority for nomination ( the rule would remain in place until it was revoked by Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1936 ) . Following a historical pattern in which a minority faction of Northern Democrats delivered votes to produce southern wing victories for pro-slavery legislation , the Van Burenite delegates split over the pivotal vote . Fully one-third of the pro-Van Buren delegates ( 52 of 154 ) voted to reinstate the two-thirds rule , along with 90 of 104 anti-Van Buren delegates , producing a final vote of 148 to 116 . Van Buren supporters persisted in spite of this setback , garnering 146 votes for their candidate on the first ballot , a 55% simple majority , but short of the now required 177 votes . Middle and Deep South pro-annexationists opposed Van Buren 75 for victory . Support for Van Buren dwindled in subsequent ballots from 146 to 99 , at which point Van Burenites were reduced to blocking nominations of numerous candidates , among them James Buchanan , Lewis Cass of Michigan , John C. Calhoun and Levi Woodbury of New Hampshire . Southern intransigence had succeeded in eliminating Van Buren and his principled stand on Texas annexation . If the Democratic Party was to avoid dissolution at a national level , an acceptable nominee , fully committed to immediate annexation would be required , yet capable of unifying the party in the general election . # #James K. Polk : Dark horse# # Southern Democrats benefited from the Tyler-Calhoun machinations in eliminating Martin Van Buren as a presidential candidate , and clearing the way for the pro-annexation nationalist Polk . On the eighth ballot , Polk was offered to the convention as an acceptable alternative for all Democratic factions at odds over the Texas annexation crisis . Despite Polk 's fervent advocacy for annexation , he had remained loyal to Van Buren throughout the Texas controversy , and anti-annexationist Van Burenites were willing him as a suitable vice-presidential choice to have complimented a Van Buren ticket . Despite Whig efforts to cast Polk as an unknown Who is James K. Polk they asked rhetorically he was respected as an effective political operator . His sobriquet The Young Hickory contained a dual reference , one to his mentor Andrew Old Hickory Jackson , and one to the term Young America , a reference to an international movements struggling to establish republican forms of government and the overthrow of monarchies and ascribed to Manifest Destiny Democrats . James K. Polk , a slaveholder , never enunciated a slavery expansionist position with respect to Texas annexation , as had John C. Calhoun and the southern extremists . As a national imperialist , he exhibited an unwavering support for Manifest Destiny , perceived as a non-sectional devotion to expansionism , whether slave-soil Texas or free-soil Oregon Territory . Polk 's political reputation was expected to diffuse northern Democratic resentment towards the Slavepower , while delivering Texas to the Deep South . On May 29 , 1844 , Polk was confirmed unanimously on the ninth ballot as the Democratic 's decision to unite under a pro-annexation candidate , and worked to win New York state for Polk . The anti-annexationist Silas Wright , US Senator from New York , was offered the nomination for Polk 's vice-presidential running mate . Wright declined on principle , and the convention settled on George M. Dallas , a conservative from Pennsylvania . # Democratic Party campaign tactics # Historian Sean Wilentz describes some the Democrat campaign tactics : # Senate vote on the Tyler-Texas Treaty # The Tyler-Texas annexation treaty , submitted to the Senate in April 1844 , was defeated in the Whig controlled Senate , largely along partisan lines , 16 to 35 a two-thirds majority against passage on June 8 , 1844 . Whigs voted 27-1 against the treaty : all northern Whig Senators voted nay , and fourteen of fifteen southern Whig Senators had joined them . Democrats voted for the treaty 15-8 , with a slight majority of Northern Democrats opposing . Southern Democrats affirmed the treaty 10-1 , with only one slave state Senator , Thomas Hart Benton , voting against . Three days later , Tyler the supermajority requirement for Senate treaty approval . Substituting the constitutional protocols for admitting regions of the United States into the Union as states , Tyler proposed that alternative , yet constitutional , means be used to bring the Republic of Texas a foreign country into the Union . Tyler and Calhoun , formerly staunch supporters of minority safeguards based on the supermajority requirements for national legislation , now altered their position to facilitate passage of the Tyler treaty . Tyler 's attempt to evade the Senate vote launched a spirited Congressional debate . # National Democratic-Republican Party campaign and convention # # # Tyler and Texas # # When the Senate closed session debates on the Tyler-Texas treaty were leaked to the public on April 27 , 1844 , Tyler 's only hope of success in influencing passage of the his treaty was to intervene directly as candidate in the 1844 election as Kingmaker . His Democratic-Republican Party a recycling of Thomas Jefferson 's party name held its convention on May 27 , 1844 in Baltimore , Maryland , a short distance from the unfolding Democratic Party convention that would the same day without challenge , accepting the honor on May 30 , 1844 . He designated no vice-president as running mate . Democratic Party nominee James K. Polk was faced with the possibility that a Tyler ticket might shift votes away from the Democrats and provide Whig Henry Clay with the margin of victory in a close race . Tyler made clear in his convention acceptance speech that his overriding concern was the ratification of his Texas annexation treaty . Moreover , he hinted that he would drop out of the race when that end was assured , informing Polk , through Senator Robert J. Walker , that his campaign efforts were simply a vehicle to mobilize support for Texas annexation . Tyler concentrated his resources in the states of New York , Pennsylvania and New Jersey , all highly contested states in the election . Securing enough Democratic support , his withdrawal might prove indispensable to Polk . Polk was receptive as long as Tyler could withdraw without raising suspicion of a secret bargain . To solidify Tyler 's cooperation , Polk enlisted Andrew Jackson to reassure Tyler that On August 20 , 1844 , Tyler dropped out of the presidential race ; Tylerites moved quickly to support the Democratic Party nominee . # Other nominations # James Birney ran as the anti-slavery Liberty Party candidate , garnering 2.3% of the popular vote , and over 8% of the vote in Massachusetts , New Hampshire and Vermont . The votes he won were more than the difference in votes between Henry Clay and James K. Polk ; some scholars have argued that Birney 's support among anti-slavery Whigs in New York swung that decisive state in favor of Polk ( see below ) . Joseph Smith , Jr. , mayor of Nauvoo , Illinois , and founder of the Latter Day Saint movement , ran as an independent . He proposed the redemption of slaves by selling public lands and decreasing the size and salary of the United States Congress ; the closure of prisons ; the annexation of Texas , Oregon , and parts of Canada ; the securing of international rights on high seas ; free trade ; and the re-establishment of a national bank . The campaign Carthage , IL jail on June 27 , 1844. # Election results # Polk 's adoption of Manifest Destiny paid dividends at the polls . No longer identified with the Tyler-Calhoun southern crusade for slavery , the western Democrats could embrace Texas annexation . The Democrats enjoyed a huge upsurge in voter turnout up to 20% - over the figures from 1840 , especially in the Northwest and Mid-Atlantic regions . The Whigs showed only a 4% increase . The Democrats won Michigan , Illinois and Indiana , and nearly took Ohio , where Manifest Destiny was strongest . In the Deep South , Clay lost every state to Polk , a huge reversal from the 1840 race but carried most of the Middle and Border South . Clay 's waffling on Texas may have cost him the 41 electoral votes in both New York and Michigan . Here , the former slaveholder , now abolitionist , James G. Birney of the Liberty Party , received 15 , 812 and 3,632 , respectively , on the basis of his unwavering stand against Texas annexation . Polk won by a mere 5,106 3,422 out of 52,096 votes in Michigan . Had either of these voting blocks cast their ballots for the anti-annexationist Clay , he would have defeated Polk . Despite this , Clay 's opposition to annexation and western slavery expansion served him well among Northern Whigs and nearly secured him the election . Source ( Popular Vote ) : Source ( Electoral Vote ) : <sup> ( a ) </sup> ' ' The popular vote figures exclude South Carolina where the Electors were chosen by the state legislature rather than by popular vote . ' ' # Results by state # # Electoral College selection # # Consequences # Polk 's election confirmed the American public 's desire for westward expansion . The annexation of Texas was formalized on March 1 , 1845 , before Polk even took office . As feared , Mexico refused to accept the annexation and the Mexican-American War broke out in 1846 . With Polk 's main issue of Texas settled , instead of demanding all of Oregon , he compromised and the United States and United Kingdom negotiated the Oregon Treaty # See also # Second Party System * United States House elections , 1844 * Inauguration of James K. Polk # Notes # 
 NOTOC Year 1289 ( MCCLXXXIX ) was a common year starting on Saturday ( link will display the full calendar ) of the Julian calendar . # Events # <onlyinclude> # By place # # #America # # * The 5,453 meter ( 17,887 feet ) high volcano Popocatpetl is first ascended by members of the Tecuanipas tribe in present-day Mexico . # # Asia # # * April 27 &amp;ndash ; Fall of Tripoli : Mamluk sultan Qalawun captures the County of Tripoli ( in present-day Lebanon ) after a month-long siege , thus extinguishing the crusader state . * Prince Subaru of Japan conquers the province of Saitama. # # Europe # # * June 11 &amp;ndash ; The Italian Guelph and Ghibelline factions fight in the Battle of Campaldino ; the Guelph victory secures their position of power in Florence . * Construction of Conwy Castle , ordered by King Edward I of England , is completed in Wales . * Jews are expelled from Gascony and Anjou in France . * Construction of the Belaya Vezha tower in Belarus is completed . # By constitutes the University of Montpellier in France by papal bull , combining various existing schools under the mantle of a single university . # #Markets# # * In Siena , twenty three partners , including five members of the Bonsignori family , re-create the Gran Tavola , formerly the most successful European bank , which had ceased its operations after the death of its creator and manager Orlando Bonsignori in 1273. # #Religion# # * Franciscan friars begin missionary work in China . </onlyinclude> # Births # * October 4 &amp;ndash ; King Louis X of France ( d. 1316 ) * October 6 &amp;ndash ; King Wenceslaus III of Bohemia ( d. 1306 ) * King Leo IV of Armenia ( d. 1307 ) # Deaths # * January 16 &amp;ndash ; Buqa , Mongol minister * March 12 &amp;ndash ; King Demetre II of Georgia ( b. 1259 ) * King Leo III of Armenia * Petrus de Dacia , Swedish monk and author * Ugolino della Gherardesca * Ippen , Japanese monk ( b. 1239 ) * Gruffydd Fychan I , last ruling prince of Powys Fadog # 
 Mahikeng formerly , and still commonly , known as Mafikeng and historically Mafeking in English ( see name history below ) is the capital city of the North-West Province of South Africa . It is best known internationally for the Siege of Mafeking , the most famous engagement of the Second Boer War . Located close to South Africa 's border with Botswana , Mahikeng is 1400km mi northeast of Cape Town and 260km mi west of Johannesburg . In 2001 , it had a population of 49,300 . In 2007 , Mafikeng was reported to have a population of 250,000 of which the CBD constitutes between 69,000 and 75,000 . It is built on the open veld at an elevation of 1500mft 0 , by the banks of the Upper Molopo River . The Madibi goldfields are some 15km mi south of the town . # History # Mahikeng is the headquarters of the people . The town was founded by Molema Tawana ( c. 1822-January 1882 ) . Born in Khunwana during the ' ' difaqane ' ' period , Molema was the son of Kgosi close confidant , Montshiwa , later became chief . During the period that the Tshidi Barolong resided at Thaba Nchu , where they found refuge during the difaqane , Molema was converted to Christianity by the Wesleyan missionaries based there . Molema 's son and heir , Silas Molema , was educated at Healdtown College . ( Silas helped his nephew Sebopioa Molema get to the United States about 1904 to study law at Wilberforce University in Wilberforce , Ohio . ) In 1857 Molema led an advance guard to scout out the area along the Molopo River . This was a familiar area as they had previously lived in nearby Khunwana . Molema settled at Mafikeng ( known in its early years as Molemas town ) , while the main body of the Barolong under Montshiwa followed . But Montshiwa did not feel safe at Mafikeng due to the close presence and encroachment of the Boers in the Transvaal . He led his followers to Moshaneng in the territory of the Bangwaketse in present-day Botswana . Molema remained at Mafikeng to ensure that the Barolong retained a presence there . sites in the proximity of the Molopo . Molema had to use all his diplomatic skills on several occasions to prevent Boer incursion and settlement near Mafikeng . He has been described as a man of strong personality and exceptional gifts ... and Montshiwa 's chief counsellor in vital matters . ( S.M Molema:35 ) After negotiations with Molema , Montshiwa decided to return to Mafikeng in 1876 . Molema was a firm believer in Western education , having attended Healdtown ; he opened a school for the Barolong once they had settled in the district . Molema became a farmer and businessman , as well as advising his brother Montshiwa . He died in 1882 . One of his sons , Silas Molema , became a Doctor and historian of the Barolong. ( see S.M. Molema ) . The settlement was named Mafikeng , a ' ' Setswana ' ' name meaning place of stones . Later British settlers spelled the name as Mafeking . The Jameson Raid started from Pitsani Pothlugo ( or Potlogo ) 24 mi north of Mafeking on December 29 , 1895 . At the outbreak was besieged . The Siege of Mafeking lasted 217 days from October 1899 to May 1900 , and turned Robert Baden-Powell into a national hero . In September 1904 , Lord Roberts unveiled an obelisk at Mafeking bearing the names of those who fell in defence of the town . In all , 212 people were killed during the siege , with more than 600 wounded . Boer losses were significantly higher . Although it was outside the protectorate 's borders , Mafeking served as capital of the Bechuanaland Protectorate from 1894 until 1965 , when Gaborone was made the capital of what was to become Botswana . Mafeking also briefly served as capital of the pre-independence Bantustan of Bophuthatswana in the 1970s , before the adjoining town of Mmabatho was established as capital . Following a local referendum on the issue , Mafeking joined Bophuthatswana in 1980 , three years after Bophuthatswana was awarded independence , and was renamed ' ' Mafikeng ' ' , and treated as a suburb of Mmabatho . Following the end of apartheid in 1994 , the merged Mafikeng and Mmabatho was instated as capital Major Facilities # North-West University Mafikeng Train Station Mmabatho Stadium Mafikeng Airport Mafikeng Game Reserve(4800Ha) Botsalano Game Reserve(5800Ha) Molemane Eye Nature Reserve # Name # The town 's name was first spelt by British settlers as Mafeking , but the name reverted to Mafikeng in 1980 following its incorporation into Bophuthatswana . In February 2010 , Lulu Xingwana , the then Minister of Arts and Culture , approved the town 's name to be changed again to Mahikeng . Despite this the town 's ANC-run local government and most local residents still refer to the town as Mafikeng both informally and formally . # Notable people from Mahikeng # Dr Silas Molema : Medical Doctor , businessman and historian of the Barolong . Judge Yvonne Mokgoro : Former Justice at Constitutional Court of South Africa . Credo Mutwa : Lived for numerous years and created arts village of Lotlamoreng , located on the outskirts of Mafikeng. # Climate 
 Cloud albedo is a measure of the albedo of a cloud - higher values mean that the cloud reflects more solar radiation , or less radiation is transmitted . Cloud albedo varies from less than 10% to more than 90% and depends on drop sizes , liquid water or ice content , thickness of the cloud , and the sun 's zenith angle . The smaller the drops and the greater the liquid water content , the greater the cloud albedo , if all other factors are the same . Low , thick clouds ( such as stratocumulus ) primarily reflect incoming solar radiation , causing it to have a high albedo , whereas high , thin clouds ( such as Cirrus ) tend to transmit it to the surface but then trap outgoing infrared radiation , causing it to have low albedo . It contributes to the greenhouse effect . 
 birthplace = Beauvais , Oise , France deathplace = Paris Henri Lon Lebesgue ForMemRS ( ; June 28 , 1875 July 26 , 1941 ) was a French mathematician most famous for his theory of integration , which was a generalization of the 17th century concept of integrationsumming the area between an axis and the curve of a function defined for that axis . His theory was published originally in his dissertation ' ' Intgrale , longueur , aire ' ' ( Integral , length , area ) at the University of Nancy during 1902. # Personal life # Henri Lebesgue was born on 28 June 1875 in Beauvais , Oise . Lebesgue 's father was a typesetter and his mother was a school teacher . His parents assembled at home a library that the young Henri was able to use . Unfortunately his father died of tuberculosis when Lebesgue was still very young and his mother had to support him by herself . As he showed a remarkable talent for mathematics in primary school , one of his instructors arranged for community support to continue his education and Lyce Louis-le-Grand in Paris . In 1894 Lebesgue was accepted at the cole Normale Suprieure , where he continued to focus his energy on the study of mathematics , graduating in 1897 . After graduation he remained at the cole Normale Suprieure for two years , working in the library , where he became aware of the research on discontinuity done at that time by Ren-Louis Baire , a recent graduate of the school . At the same time he started his graduate studies at the Sorbonne , where he learned about mile Borel 's work on the incipient measure theory and Camille Jordan 's work on the Jordan measure . In 1899 he moved to a teaching position at the Lyce Central in Nancy , while continuing work on his doctorate . In 1902 he earned his Ph.D . from the Sorbonne with the seminal thesis on Integral , Length , Area , submitted with Borel , four years older , as advisor . Lebesgue married the sister of one of his fellow students , and he and his wife had two children , Suzanne and Jacques . After position at the University of Rennes , lecturing there until 1906 , when he moved to the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Poitiers . In 1910 Lebesgue moved to the Sorbonne as a matre de confrences , being promoted to professor starting with 1919 . In 1921 he left the Sorbonne to become professor of mathematics at the Collge de France , where he lectured and did research for the rest of his life . In 1922 he was elected a member of the Acadmie franaise . Henri Lebesgue died on 26 July 1941 in Paris . # Mathematical career # Lebesgue 's first paper was published in 1898 and was titled Sur l'approximation des fonctions . It dealt with Weierstrass ' theorem on approximation to continuous functions by polynomials . Between March 1899 and April 1901 Lebesgue published six notes in ' ' Comptes Rendus . ' ' The first of these , unrelated to his development of Lebesgue integration , dealt with the extension of Baire 's theorem to functions of two variables . The next five dealt with surfaces applicable to a plane , the area a given bound , and the final note gave the definition of Lebesgue integration for some function f(x) . Lebesgue 's great thesis , ' ' Intgrale , longueur , aire ' ' , with the full account of this work , appeared in the Annali di Matematica in 1902 . The first chapter develops the theory of measure ( see Borel measure ) . In the second chapter he defines the integral both geometrically and analytically . The next chapters expand the ' ' Comptes Rendus ' ' notes dealing with length , area and applicable surfaces . The final chapter deals mainly with Plateau 's problem . This dissertation is considered to be one of the finest ever written by a mathematician . His lectures from 1902 to 1903 were collected into a Borel tract ' ' Leons sur l'intgration et la recherche des fonctions primitives ' ' . The problem of integration regarded as the search for a primitive function is the keynote of the book . Lebesgue presents the problem of integration in its historical context , addressing Augustin-Louis Cauchy , Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet , and desirable that the integral should satisfy , the last of which is If the sequence f <sub> n </sub> ( x ) increases to the limit f(x) , the integral of f <sub> n </sub> ( x ) tends to the integral of f(x) . Lebesgue shows that his conditions lead to the theory of measure and measurable functions and the analytical and geometrical definitions of the integral . He turned next to trigonometric functions with his 1903 paper Sur les sries trigonomtriques . He presented three major theorems in this work : that a trigonometrical series representing a bounded function is a Fourier series , that the n <sup> th </sup> Fourier coefficient tends to zero ( the RiemannLebesgue lemma ) , and that a Fourier series is integrable term by term . In 1904-1905 Lebesgue lectured once again at the Collge de France , this time on trigonometrical series and he went on to publish his lectures in another of the Borel tracts . In this tract he once again treats the subject in its historical context . He expounds on Fourier series , Cantor-Riemann theory , the Poisson , Reprsentation trigonomtrique approche des fonctions satisfaisant a une condition de Lipschitz deals with the Fourier series of functions satisfying a Lipschitz condition , with an evaluation of the order of magnitude of the remainder term . He also proves that the RiemannLebesgue lemma is a best possible result for continuous functions , and gives some treatment to Lebesgue constants . Lebesgue once wrote , Rduites des thories gnrales , les mathmatiques seraient une belle forme sans contenu . ( Reduced to general theories , mathematics would be a beautiful form without content . ) In measure-theoretic analysis and related branches of mathematics , the LebesgueStieltjes integral generalizes RiemannStieltjes and Lebesgue integration , preserving the many advantages of the latter in a more general measure-theoretic framework . During the course of his career , Lebesgue also made forays into the realms of complex analysis and topology . He also had a disagreement with Borel ( called ' ' teilweise heftig ' ' ) with regards to effective calculation . However , these minor forays pale in comparison to his contributions to real analysis ; his contributions to this field had a his methods have become an essential part of modern analysis . Additionally , he is claimed to be the last of the mathematicians to consider one to be a prime number . # Lebesgue 's theory of integration # This is a non-technical treatment from a historical point of view ; see the article ' ' Lebesgue integration ' ' for a technical treatment from a mathematical point of view . Integration is a mathematical operation that corresponds to the informal idea of finding the area under the graph of a function . The first theory of integration was developed by Archimedes in the 3rd century BC with his method of quadratures , but this could be applied only in limited circumstances with a high degree of geometric symmetry . In the 17th century , Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz discovered the idea that integration was intrinsically linked to differentiation , the latter being a way of measuring how quickly a function changed at any given point on the graph . This surprising relationship between two major geometric operations in calculus , differentiation and integration , is now known as to calculate a broad class of integrals for the first time . However , unlike Archimedes ' method , which was based on Euclidean geometry , mathematicians felt that Newton 's and Leibniz 's integral calculus did not have a rigorous foundation . In the 19th century , Augustin Cauchy developed epsilon-delta limits , and Bernhard Riemann followed up on this by formalizing what is now called the Riemann integral . To define this integral , one fills the area under the graph with smaller and smaller rectangles and takes the limit of the sums of the areas of the rectangles at each stage . For some functions , however , the total area of these rectangles does not approach a single number . As such , they have no Riemann integral . Lebesgue invented a new method of integration to solve this problem . Instead of using the areas of rectangles , which put the focus on the domain of the function , Lebesgue looked at the codomain of the function for his fundamental unit of area . Lebesgue 's idea was to first define measure , for both sets build the integral for what he called simple functions ; measurable functions that take only finitely many values . Then he defined it for more complicated functions as the least upper bound of all the integrals of simple functions smaller than the function in question . Lebesgue integration has the property that every function defined over a bounded interval with a Riemann integral also has a Lebesgue integral , and for those functions the two integrals agree . Furthermore , every bounded function on a closed bounded interval has a Lebesgue integral and there are many functions with a Lebesgue integral that have no Riemann integral . As part of the development of Lebesgue integration , Lebesgue invented the concept of measure , which extends the idea of length from intervals to a very large class of sets , called measurable sets ( so , more precisely , simple functions are functions that take a finite number of values , and each value is taken on a measurable set ) . Lebesgue 's technique for turning a measure into an integral generalises easily to many other situations , leading to the deficient in one respect . The Riemann integral generalises to the improper Riemann integral to measure functions whose domain of definition is not a closed interval . The Lebesgue integral integrates many of these functions ( always reproducing the same answer when it did ) , but not all of them . For functions on the real line , the Henstock integral is an even more general notion of integral ( based on Riemann 's theory rather than Lebesgue 's ) that subsumes both Lebesgue integration and improper Riemann integration . However , the Henstock integral depends on specific ordering features of the real line and so does not generalise to allow integration in more general spaces ( say , manifolds ) , while the Lebesgue integral extends to such spaces quite naturally . 
 Edith Louisa Cavell ( ; 4 December 1865 12 October 1915 ) was a British nurse . She is celebrated for saving the lives of soldiers from both sides without distinction and in helping some 200 Allied soldiers escape from German-occupied Belgium during the First World War , for which she was arrested . She was subsequently court-martialled , found guilty of treason and sentenced to death . Despite international pressure for mercy , she was shot by a German firing squad . Her execution received worldwide condemnation and extensive press coverage . She is well known for her statement that patriotism is not enough . Her strong Anglican beliefs propelled her to help all those who needed it , both German and Allied soldiers . She was quoted as saying , I cant stop while there are lives to be saved . 12 October is appointed for her commemoration in the Anglican church , although this is not a saint 's feast day in the traditional sense . Edith Cavell , who was 49 at the time of her execution , was already notable as a pioneer career # Edith Cavell was born on 4 December 1865 in Swardeston , a village near Norwich , where her father was vicar for 45 years . She was the eldest of the four children of the Reverend Frederick and Louisa Sophia Cavell and was taught always to share with the less fortunate , despite her familys meagre income . After a period as a governess , including for a family in Brussels 18901895 , she trained as a nurse at the London Hospital under Matron Eva Luckes and worked in various hospitals in England , including Shoreditch Infirmary . In 1907 , Cavell was recruited by Dr Antoine Depage to be matron of a newly established nursing school , L ' cole Belge dInfirmires Diplmes , ( or The Berkendael Medical Institute ) on the Rue de la Culture ( now Rue Franz Merjay ) , Ixelles in Brussels . By 1910 , Miss Cavell felt that the profession of nursing had gained sufficient foothold in Belgium to warrant the publishing of a professional journal , and therefore launched the nursing journal , ' ' L'infirmire ' ' . A hospitals , 24 schools , and 13 kindergartens in Belgium . When the First World War broke out , she was visiting her widowed mother in Norfolk in the East of England . She returned to Brussels , where her clinic and nursing school were taken over by the Red Cross . # First World War and execution # In November 1914 , after the German occupation of Brussels , Cavell began sheltering British soldiers and funnelling them out of occupied Belgium to the neutral Netherlands . Wounded British and French soldiers and Belgian and French civilians of military age were hidden from the Germans and provided with false papers by Prince Reginald de Croy at his chteau of Bellignies near Mons. From there , they were conducted by various guides to the houses of Cavell , Louis Sverin and others in Brussels , and furnished by them with money to reach the Dutch frontier and with guides obtained through Philippe Baucq . She was arrested on 3 August 1915 and charged with harbouring Allied soldiers . She had been betrayed by Gaston Quien , who was later convicted by a was prosecuted for aiding British and French soldiers , in addition to young Belgian men , to cross the border and eventually enter Britain . She admitted her guilt when she signed a statement the day before the trial . Cavell declared that the soldiers she had helped escape thanked her in writing when arriving safely in Britain . This admission confirmed that Cavell had helped the soldiers navigate the Dutch frontier , but it also established that she helped them escape to a country at war with Germany . The penalty according to German military law was death . Paragraph 58 of the German Military Code said ; Will be sentenced to death for treason any person who , with the intention of helping the hostile Power , or of causing harm to the German or allied troops , is guilty of one of the crimes of paragraph 90 of the German Penal Code . The case referred to in the above-mentioned paragraph 90 consists of Conducting soldiers to the enemy . Additionally , the penalties according to paragraph 160 of the German Code , in case of war , First Geneva Convention ordinarily guaranteed protection of medical personnel , that protection was forfeit if used as cover for any belligerent action . This forfeiture is expressed in article 7 of the 1906 version of the Convention , which was the version in force at the time . The German authorities instead justified prosecution merely on the basis of the German law and the interests of the German state . The British government could do nothing to help her . Sir Horace Rowland of the Foreign Office said , I am afraid that it is likely to go hard with Miss Cavell ; I am afraid we are powerless . Lord Robert Cecil , Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs , said , Any representation by us , he advised , will do her more harm than good . The United States , however , had not yet joined the war and was in a position to apply diplomatic pressure . Hugh S. Gibson , First Secretary of the U.S. legation at Brussels , made clear to the German government that executing Cavell would further harm Germany 's already damaged reputation . Later von der Lancken of the burning of Leuven Baron von der Lancken is known to have stated that Cavell should be pardoned because of her complete honesty and because she had helped save so many lives , German as well as Allied . However , Traugott von Sauberzweig Cavell was not arrested for espionage , as many were led to believe , but for treason . When in custody , Cavell was questioned in French , but the session was minuted in German . This gave the interrogator the opportunity to misinterpret her answers . Although she may have been misrepresented , she made no attempt to defend herself . Cavell was provided with a defender approved by the German military governor . A previous defender , who was chosen for Cavell by her assistant , Elizabeth Wilkins , The night before her execution , she told the Reverend Stirling Gahan , the Anglican chaplain who had been allowed to see her and to give her Holy Communion , Patriotism is not enough . I must have no hatred or bitterness towards anyone . From his sick bed Brand Whitlock , on Cavell 's behalf to Moritz von Bissing , the governor general of Belgium . Hugh Gibson ; Maitre G. de Leval , the legal adviser to the United States legation ; and Rodrigo Saavedra y Vinent , 2nd Marques de Villalobar , the Spanish minister , formed a midnight deputation of appeal for mercy or at least postponement of sentence . There is also a dispute over the sentencing imposed under the German Military Code . Supposedly , the death penalty relevant to the offence committed by Cavell was not officially declared until a few hours after her death . On instructions from the Spanish minister , Belgian women immediately buried her body next to Saint-Gilles Prison . # Role in First World War propaganda # In the months and years following Cavell 's death , countless newspaper articles , pamphlets , images , and books publicised her story . She became an iconic propaganda figure for military recruitment in Britain , and to help increase favourable sentiment towards the Allies in the United States . She was a popular icon because of her sex , her nursing profession , was represented as an act of German barbarism and moral depravity . News reports shortly following Cavell 's execution were found to be only true in part . Even the ' ' American Journal of Nursing ' ' repeated the fictional account of Cavell 's execution in which she fainted and fell because of her refusal to wear a blindfold in front of the firing squad . Allegedly , while she lay unconscious , the German commanding officer shot her dead with a revolver . Numerous accounts like these stimulated international outrage and general anti-German sentiments . Along with the invasion of Belgium , and the sinking of the ' ' RMS Lusitania Because of the British government 's decision to use Cavell 's story as propaganda , she became the most prominent British female casualty of First World War . The combination of heroic appeal and a resonant atrocity-story narrative made Cavell 's case one of the most effective in British propaganda of the First World War , as well as a factor in enduring post-war anti-German sentiment . Before the First World War , Cavell was not well known different depictions of her in British propaganda , which ignored anything that did not fit this image , including the suggestion that Cavell , during her interrogation , had given information that incriminated others . In November 1915 , the British Foreign Office issued a denial that Cavell had implicated anyone else in her testimony . One image commonly represented was of Cavell as an innocent victim of a ruthless and dishonourable enemy . This view depicted her as innocent of espionage , and was most commonly used in various forms of British propaganda , such as postcards and newspaper illustrations during the war . Her story was presented in the British press as a means of fuelling a desire for revenge on the battlefield . These images implied that men must enlist in the armed forces immediately in order to stop the murder of innocent British women . Another , second , representation of Cavell during the First World War saw her described as a serious , reserved , brave , and patriotic woman who devoted her life to nursing and died to save others . This portrayal has been of the Red Cross nurse . Pastor Le Seur , the German army chaplain , recalled at the time of her execution , I do not believe that Miss Cavell wanted to be a martyrbut she was ready to die for her country Miss Cavell was a very brave woman and a faithful Christian . # German response # Unlike the rest of the world , the German government thought that they had acted fairly towards Cavell . In a letter , German undersecretary for Foreign Affairs Dr Alfred Zimmermann ( not to be confused with Arthur Zimmerman , German Secretary for Foreign Affairs ) made a statement to the press on behalf of the German government : From the Germans ' perspective , had they released Cavell , there would have been a surge in the number of women participating in acts against Germany because they knew they would not be severely punished . It was up to the responsible men to follow their legal duty to Germany and ignore the worlds condemnation . Their laws do not make distinctions between sexes , the only exception to this rule being ( probably this means pregnant ) condition could not be executed . The German government also believed that all of the convicted people were thoroughly aware of the nature of their acts . The court paid particular attention to this point , releasing several accused persons because there was doubt as to whether the accused knew that their actions were punishable. # Burial and memorials # Cavell 's remains were returned to Britain after the war and a state funeral was held at Westminster Abbey . On 19 May 1919 , her body was reburied at the east side of Norwich Cathedral ; a graveside service is still held each October . The railway van that conveyed her remains from Dover to London is kept as a memorial on the Kent and East Sussex Railway and is usually open to view at Bodiam railway station . Following Cavell 's death , many memorials were created around the world to remember her . One of the first was the one unveiled 12 October 1918 by Alexandra of Denmark In the Calendar of saints ( Church of England ) the day appointed for is a memorial in her honour rather than formal canonisation . Cavell is to be featured on a UK commemorative 5 coin , part of a set to be issued in 2015 by the Royal Mint to mark the centenary of the war . Other honours include : # Memorials # * a dedication on the war memorial on the grounds of Sacred Trinity Church , Salford , Greater Manchester , UK * a marble and stone memorial in Kings Domain in Melbourne , Australia * a memorial by Henry Alfred Pegram outside Norwich Cathedral , UK * a memorial in Peterborough Cathedral , England * a stone memorial in Paris , one of two statues that Adolf Hitler ordered destroyed on his 1940 visit ( the other being that of Charles Mangin ) * a stone memorial statue by Canadian sculptor R. Tait McKenzie in the garden behind the Red Cross National ( U.S. ) Headquarters , 1730 E Street , NW Washington , DC , USA * a stone memorial , including a statue of Cavell by George Frampton unveiled in 1920 , adjacent to Trafalgar Square in London 35 people executed by the German army in Tir National in Schaerbeek , Brussels , Belgium * Monument to Edith Cavell and Marie Depage by Paul Du Bois in Brussels # Medical and nursing facilities # * A ward in the Basildon University Hospital , Basildon , Essex * A building at the Medical School , University of Queensland , Australia * A ward in the Whittington Hospital in Archway , London * A wing of Homerton Hospital , Hackney , London * A wing of Toronto Western Hospital , Canada * Cavell Gardens Care Home , Vancouver , Canada ; the site was Edith Cavell Hospital from 1955 to 2000 * Cavell House Care Home , Middle Road , Shoreham-by-Sea BN43 6GS * Cavell Ward at the former Digby Hospital Exeter ( Exe Vale Hospitals group ) * Edith Cavell Care Centre , Lethbridge , Alberta , Canada * The Edith Cavell Home , Hospital , and Village ( a retirement village ) in Sumner , Christchurch , New Zealand * The Edith Cavell Clinic in the Brussels borough of Uccle ( Ukkel ) , Belgium * Edith Cavell Hospital of her education * Cavell Building , Quinte Children 's Treatment Centre , Belleville , Ontario , Canada ( demolished in 2013 ) * Edith Cavell Regional School of Nursing , in Belleville , Ontario , Canada ( demolished in 2013 ) * Edith Cavell Surgery in Streatham , London * Sanatorium Edith Cavell , Obourg , Belgium * University of East Anglia , Norwich , named its School of Nursing Sciences building the Edith Cavell Building ( ECB ) , when it opened in 2006 # Streets # * Rue Edith Cavell , in Brussels ( where there is an hospital named Edith Cavell , next to previous Rue de la Culture where was her first nurse school ) * Avenue Edith Cavell , Hyres , France * Avenue Edith-Cavell , in Nice , France * Avenue Miss Cavell , Saint-Maur-des-Fosss , France * Cavell Avenue in Etobicoke , Ontario , Canada * Cavell Avenue in Guelph , Ontario * Cavell Avenue in The Danforth neighbourhood of Toronto , Ontario * Cavell Avenue , in Trenton , New Jersey , USA * Cavell Avenue , Twin Cities , Minnesota , , ( this has been demolished ) * Cavell Drive in Bishops Stortford , Hertfordshire , England * Cavell Drive in Winnipeg , Manitoba , Canada * Cavell Drive , Portsmouth , UK ( Queen Alexandra Hospital ) * Cavell Road , Billericay , Essex , England * Cavell Road , Dudley , West Midlands ( county ) * Cavell Road , Norwich , England * Cavell Street ( formerly known as Bedford Street ) , running next to the London Hospital in Whitechapel , London , where Cavell trained * Cavell Street , Dunedin , New Zealand * Cavell Street , Reefton , New Zealand * Cavell Street , West Hobart , Tasmania , Australia * Cavell Street , Westland , Michigan , USA * Cavell Walk , Stevenage , England * Cavell Way , Maidenbower , Crawley , West Sussex , England * Cavell Way , Pendleton , Salford , Greater Manchester * Edith Cavell Boulevard , a road in Port Stanley , Ontario , Canada * Edith Cavell Close , Openshaw , Manchester * Edith Cavell Court , Kingston upon Hull , England * Edith Cavell Drive Steeple Johannesburg , South Africa * Edith Cavell Street in Port Louis , Mauritius * Edith Cavell Way , Shooters Hill , London * Edith Cavellstraat , a street in Ostend , Belgium * Nurse Cavell Lane , Paparoa , Northland , New Zealand * Rua Edith Cavell , a street in Lisbon , Portugal * Rue Edith Cavell / Edith Cavellstraat , a street in Uccle ( Ukkel ) , Brussels , Belgium * Rue Edith Cavell , Le Havre , France * Rue Edith Cavell , Vitry-sur-Seine , France * Rue Miss Cavell , Arques , France * Rue Miss Edith Cawell , Creil , France # Schools , houses and school buildings # * A middle school in Windsor , Ontario , Canada , which closed in 1987 * An elementary school in Sault Ste. Marie , Ontario , Canada , which was later renamed to S.F. Howe * Cavell , a house at Stamford High School * Cavell House , blue house at Sheringham High School , Norfolk , England * Cavell House , dark blue house at Jersey College for Girls * Cavell House , green house House , green house at Queen Mary School , Mumbai , India * Cavell House , Northlands School ( founded 1920 ) , Olivos , Argentina * Cavell House , red house at Cliff Park Junior School , Gorleston * Cavell House , the fourth , blue house of St Aidan 's Anglican Girls ' School , Brisbane , Australia * Cavell Primary School , Norwich , England * Edith Cavell Elementary School , St. Catharines , Ontario , Canada * Edith Cavell Elementary School , Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada * Edith Cavell House , green house at Barnes School , Deolali , India * Edith Cavell Lower School in Bedford , UK * Edith Cavell School , Moncton , New Brunswick , Canada * Wymondham College in Norfolk has a boarding block named after her * Cavell House at 26 , College Road in Norwich is where her parents lived in retirement * Edith Cavell Secondary School , Hackney , London , England * Cavell House , at Abbeydale Grammar School for Girls , Sheffield # Other # * A car park in Peterborough 's Queensgate shopping centre colour ) * Cavell Corona , a geological feature on Venus * Cavell Gardens , Inverness , Scotland * Cavell House , a guest house in Clevedon , Somerset , UK , where she spent some of her childhood * Cavell Park , a playground in Northeast Minneapolis , Minnesota , United States * Edith became a popular name for French and Belgian girls after her execution . The French chanteuse dith Piaf , born two months after Cavell was executed , was the best known of these * Edith Cavell bridge over the Shotover River in the Otago Region of New Zealand * Edith Cavell Chapter of the Daughters of the British Empire in Houston , Texas , United States * The Edith Cavell Nursing Scholarship Fund , a philanthropy of the Dallas County Medical Society Alliance Foundation providing scholarships to exceptional nursing students in Dallas , Texas , USA , and the surrounding area * The Edith Cavell public house , Tombland , Norwich , England * The Edith Cavell Trust was established by the New South Wales Nurses ' Association to provide scholarships to nurses in New South passenger luggage van that transported her remains from Dover to London during her repatriation . * Miss Edith Cavell , a variety of rose first bred in 1917 * Mount Edith Cavell , a peak in Alberta in the Canadian Rockies , named for her in 1916 * Radio Cavell broadcasting to the staff and patients of the Royal Oldham Hospital in Oldham , England * YWCA Camp Cavell in Lexington , Michigan , United States * Edith Cavell Projectile Factory in Overnewton , Glasgow , Scotland # In popular culture # # Films , plays and television # * The first film made of the story was the 1916 Australian silent film ' ' The Martyrdom of Nurse Cavell ' ' soon followed by ' ' Nurse Cavell ' ' . * In 1918 John G. Adolfi directed ' ' The Woman the Germans Shot ' ' , starring Julia Arthur as Cavell * Herbert Wilcox made a 1928 silent film based on the story called ' ' Dawn ' ' with Sybil Thorndike . He remade it as ' ' Nurse Edith Cavell ' ' ( 1939 ) starring Cavell ' ' , a 1933 play in three acts , by C. S. Forester with C. E. Bechhofer Roberts * In the second episode of the 1980 television series ' ' To Serve Them All My Days ' ' , Cavell is mentioned in a speech to the school 's Officers ' Training Corps. * In the final episode of the 2014 BBC drama series ' ' The Crimson Field ' ' , Cavell is mentioned as having been executed , during the interrogation of Sister Joan Livesey. * In ' ' Les plus grands Belges ' ' ( The Greatest Belgians ) , a 2005 television show on the Belgian French-speaking public channel RTBF , the audience voted Cavell the 48th greatest Belgian . # Music # * The song Que Sera on the album ' ' Silent June ' ' by O'Hooley &amp; Tidow was inspired by the execution of Edith Cavell . * The song Amy Quartermaine by Manning from the 2011 album ' ' Margaret 's Children ' ' is also based on the life of Cavell . # See also # * Mata Hari , 1917 , on charges of spying for Germany . * Gabrielle Petit , a Belgian nurse executed by the German army for spying for Britain in 1916. * Andre de Jongh , a Belgian nurse who in the Second World War helped POWs escape , being inspired by Edith Cavell . # Notes # # References # * cite news * * cite journal * cite journal * cite journal * cite journal * * * * * * cite journal * * * * Cite web * * * * Cite web * Cite web * cite news * cite news * * * cite news * *cite news *cite news *cite sign *cite AV media * * * * * * * *cite news *cite news * # Further reading # * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Cite web * * Cite web *cite newsauthor=title=No reprieve for angel of mercydate=9 May 2002work=BBC Newsurl=http : **40;111;TOOLONG * 
 : ' ' Distinguish from paddle and petal and the verb peddle . A pedal ( from the Latin ' ' pes ' ' , ' ' pedis ' ' , meaning ' foot ' ) is a lever activated by one 's foot , sometimes called a foot pedal ( but all pedals are used by a foot ) . It may refer to : In transport : * Automobile pedal * Bicycle pedal * Pedalo , a small boat , usually used for recreational purposes , powered by pedals * Rudder pedals , controlling aircraft rudders In music : * Piano pedals * Pedal keyboard , on pipe and electronic organs , which contains approximately one dozen to three dozen pedals that resemble the keyboards ( or manuals ) ; when one of these pedals is depressed , it causes a note ( or group of notes ) to sound * Pedal harp , the modern orchestral harp with pedals used to change the tuning of its strings * Effects pedal , used commonly for electric guitars * Pedal point , a type of nonchord tone fundamental tone played on brass instruments In other electronic equipment : * Foot pedals are often used to control playback in transcribers used in medical transcription * Footmouse , a foot-operated computer mouse In geometry : * Pedal triangle , a triangle obtained by projecting a point onto the sides of a triangle * Pedal curve , a curve derived by construction from a given curve 
 # Events and trends # * 967 BCTiglath-Pileser II becomes King of Assyria. * 967 BCSolomon becomes king of the Israelites. ( 962 BCtraditional date ) * 965 BCDavid , king of the ancient Israelites , died . # Significant people # * Solomon , king of the Kingdom of Israel * Snake Spine Ajaw of Palenque , semi legendary ( 967 BC- ? ) 
 NOTOC Year 193 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar . At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Merula and Thermus ( or , less frequently , year 561 ' ' Ab urbe condita ' ' ) . The denomination 193 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period , when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years . # Events # <onlyinclude> # By place # # # Greece # # * Eumenes II of Pergamum appeals to Rome for help against the Seleucid king Antiochus III who is threatening to conquer Greece . The Roman pro-consul Titus Quinctius Flamininus supports the Roman championship of Greek autonomy in Anatolia. * Flamininus is sent to negotiate with Antiochus III and warns him not to interfere with the Greek states . Antiochus does not accept that Flamininus has the authority to speak for the Greeks and only promises to leave Greece alone only if the Romans do the same . * Flamininus attempts to rally the Greeks against Antiochus III When the Aetolians call on Antiochus III for aid , Flamininus persuades the Achaean League to declare war on both parties . He also prevents Philopoemen from taking Sparta. * In the mean time , the Spartan ruler , Nabis , moves to recover lost territory , including Gythium. * Carneades of Cyrene moves to Athens to found the third or new Academy . # # Egypt # # * Cleopatra I Syra , daughter of Antiochus III and Laodice , marries the Egyptian King Ptolemy V Epiphanes. </onlyinclude> # Births # * # Deaths # * Xiao He , prime minister of the early Han Dynasty in China who has been a key figure in Liu Bang 's rise to power after the fall of the Qin Dynasty # References # 
 language = English ' ' The Story of Louis Pasteur ' ' is a 1936 American biographical film . It starred Paul Muni as the renowned scientist who developed major advances in microbiology which revolutionized agriculture and medicine . It was written by Pierre Collings and Sheridan Gibney , and Edward Chodorov ( uncredited ) , and directed by William Dieterle . Muni won an Academy Award for Best Actor , while Collings and Gibney won for Best Screenplay and Best Story . The film was nominated for Best Picture . # Plot # In nineteenth century France , chemist Louis Pasteur ( Paul Muni ) believes that diseases are caused by unseen microbes . His radical theory is dismissed by most doctors , particularly his most vocal critic , Dr. Charbonnet ( Fritz Leiber , Sr. ) . Nonetheless , Pasteur carries on , with the assistance of a small group of loyal researchers , and finds a cure for anthrax . He also campaigns to have doctors wash their hands and sterilize their instruments before operating . Charbonnet is so certain that Pasteur is a quack . When a triumphant Charbonnet shows no sign of contracting rabies , Pasteur is puzzled , until his wife suggests that the sample may have gotten weak with age . This sets him on the right path to finding a cure . When a frantic mother begs him to try his untested treatment on her son ( Dickie Moore ) , who has been bitten by a rabid dog , Pasteur risks imprisonment and possibly the guillotine to save the child . Even Charbonnet finally concedes that he is right . In the end , Pasteur is honored for his accomplishments. # Cast # *Paul Muni as Louis Pasteur *Josephine Hutchinson as Marie Pasteur *Anita Louise as Annette Pasteur *Donald Woods as Dr. Jean Martel *Fritz Leiber as Dr. Charbonnet *Henry O'Neill as Dr. Emile Roux *Porter Hall as Dr. Rossignol *Raymond Brown as Dr. Radisse *Akim Tamiroff as Dr. Zaranoff *Halliwell Hobbes as Dr. Lister *Frank Reicher as Dr. Pfeiffer *Dickie Moore as Joseph Meister *Ruth Robinson as Mrs. Meister *Walter Kingsford as Napoleon III *Iphigenie Castiglione as Empress Eugnie *Herbert Corthell as Louis Adolphe Thiers , President of France two radio play versions of the film : the November 23 , 1936 , episode of ' ' Lux Radio Theater ' ' and the April 13 , 1946 , episode of ' ' Academy Award Theater ' ' . 
 subdivisionname1 = Southeast Campinas ( , ' ' Plains ' ' or ' ' Meadows ' ' ) is a Brazilian city of So Paulo State , in the country 's Southeast Region . According to the 2010 Census , the city population is 1,080,999 , making it the fourteenth most populous Brazilian city and the third in the So Paulo state . The city 's metropolitan area , the Greater Campinas , as of 2013 , contains nineteen cities , including Campinas , and has a total population of 2,232,297 people . The city is home to the University of Campinas , one of the most prestigious in Latin America . # Etymology # Campinas means ' ' grass fields ' ' in Portuguese and refers to its characteristic landscape , which originally comprised large stretches of dense subtropical forests ( mato grosso or thick woods in Portuguese ) , mainly along the many rivers , interspersed with gently rolling hills covered by low-lying vegetation . Campinas was also known as Cidade das Andorinhas ( City of Swallows ) , because it was a favorite spot for to downtown Campinas . However , they almost disappeared around the 1950s , probably because the church and plaza where they used to roost were torn down . Campinas ' official crest and flag has a picture of the mythical bird , the phoenix , because it was practically reborn after a devastating epidemic of yellow fever in the 1800s , which killed more than 25% of the city 's inhabitants . The demonym for Campinas is a ' ' campineiro ' ' or campinense . # History # The city was founded on July 14 , 1774 , by Barreto Leme . It was initially a simple outpost on the way to Minas Gerais and Gois serving the Bandeirantes who were in search of precious minerals and Indian slaves . In the first half of the 19th century , Campinas became a growing population center , with many coffee , cotton and sugarcane farms . The construction of a railway linking the city of So Paulo to Santos ' seaport , in 1867 , was very important for its growth . In the second half of the 19th century , many foreign immigrants to replace the lost manpower , mainly from Italy . Coffee became an important export and the city became wealthy . In consequence , a large service sector was established to serve the growing population , and in the first decades of the 20th century , Campinas could already boast of an opera house , theaters , banks , movie theaters , radio stations , a philharmonic orchestra , two newspapers ( ' ' Correio Popular ' ' and ' ' Dirio do Povo ' ' ) , a good public education system ( with the Escola Normal de Campinas and the Colgio Culto Cincia ) , and hospitals , such as the Santa Casa de Misericrdia ( a charity for poor people ) and the Casa de Sade de Campinas ( for the Italian community , formerly known as ' ' Circolo Italiani Uniti ' ' ) , and the most important Brazilian research center in agricultural sciences , the Instituto Agronmico de Campinas , which was founded by Emperor Pedro II . Finally , the construction of the first Brazilian highway in 1938 , between Campinas turning point in the integration of Campinas into the rest of the state . Campinas was the birthplace of opera composer Carlos Gomes ( 1836 1896 ) and of the President of the Republic Campos Salles ( 1841 1913 ) . It was home for 49 years to Hrcules Florence , reputed as one of the early inventors of photography , photocopying and the mimeograph. # Geography # The area of the city , according to the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics , is 795.697 km <sup> 2 </sup> , and 238.3230 km <sup> 2 </sup> of this is the urban area and 557.334 km <sup> 2 </sup> remaining constitute constitute greater Campinas . It is located at 225421S , 470339W and is at a distance of 96 kilometers northwest of So Paulo . Its neighboring cities are Paulnia , Jaguarina and Pedreira , north ; Morungaba , Itatiba and Valinhos in the east ; Itupeva , Indaiatuba and Monte Mor , south , and Hortolndia in the west . # Ecology # Most of the original vegetation of the city was devastated . Like 13 other municipalities in the severe environmental stress , and Campinas is considered one of the areas liable to flooding and silting ; it now has less than 5% of vegetation cover . To try to reverse this situation , several projects have been and are being conducted and planned , such as building corridors , such as regulation of the Management Plan of Environmental Preservation Area ( APA ) in Campinas . There are also several environmental projects to combat the destruction of riparian forests located on the river london , which has a high level of pollution . Today , Campinas houses the Area of Relevant Ecological Interest ( ARIE ) Santa Geneva , 251 acre , established in 1985 and regulated by the Brazilian Environment and Renewable Natural Resources ( IBAMA ) , the city of Campinas , Fundao Jos Pedro de Oliveira . This is the now second largest urban forest of Brazil , behind only the Forest of Tijuca , in Rio de Janeiro . The city also has large forests , such as Jequitibs Wood ( installed in 1881 ) , Forest Grove and the Germans of Guarantees . # ( Kppen type ' ' Cwa ' ' ) , with lower rainfall in winter and an annual average temperature of 21.3 C. Winters are generally dry and mild ( rarely too cold ) , and summers rainy with warm to hot temperatures . The warmest month is February , with an average temperature of 24 C , an average maximum of 29.1 C and average minimum of 19.0 C. The coldest month , July , sees respective temperatures of 17.8 C , and 24.2 C and 11.4 C average maximum and minimum . Fall and spring are transitional seasons . The average annual rainfall is 1424.5 mm and the driest month in August , when there is only 22.9 mm . In January , the rainiest month , the average is 280.3 mm . In recent years , however , the hot , dry days during the winter have been increasingly frequent , often surpassing 30 C , especially between July and September . In August 2010 , for example , the rainfall in Campinas was only 0 mm . During the dry season and long dry spells in the fires in the hills and thickets , especially in rural areas of the city , which contributes to deforestation and the release of pollutants into the atmosphere , further worsening air quality . The lowest temperature recorded in the city was 1.5 C on June 25 , 1918 . The highest temperature was 39.0 C , observed on 17 November 1985 . The highest cumulative rainfall recorded in 24 hours in the city between June 1988 and October 2008 was 143.4 mm in 25 days May 2005 . Between 1890 and 2004 there were 41 occurrences of frost in Campinas . The most recent was on July 18 , 2000 , when the minimum temperature reached 2.2 C. There are also occasional episodes of strong winds , with gusts exceeding 100 km / h , and training records were made in the city day May 4 , 2001 and March 9 , 2008 . The wet season is from mid-October to mid-April , with heavier rains particularly in December , January , February and early March , and the dry season is from mid-May to mid-September . Average rainfall is 24.3 humidity ranges from 37% ( August ) to 56% ( January ) . In the region around Campinas near the state of Minas Gerais there are a number of cities which enjoy an even milder mountain climate , such as Serra Negra , Socorro , Lindia and guas de Lindia , where several water spas are located . # Demographics # According to the 2010 IBGE Census , and as November 2010 , Campinas had a population of 1,080,999 and a population density of 1358.6 ( inhabitants / km ) . Infant mortality levels were at up to 1 year ( per thousand ) : 14.05 and life expectation in the city was 72.22 years . The fertility rate was at 1.78 children per woman . 96.01 of the populace could read . * Human Development Index ( HDI-M ) : 0.852 ( high ) * HDI-M Income : 0.845 ( high ) * HDI-M Longevity : 0.787 * HDI-M Education : 0.925 ( very high ) ( Source : DATA ) # Ethnicity # Source : 2000 census : # Composition # Source : 2010 Census Population ( IBGE ) Campinas became an official metropolitan region ( RMC Regio Metropolitana de Campinas ) , with 19 municipalities , with a total of 2.8 million inhabitants and a total land area of 3,348 km ( data of 2010 ) , adjacent to the So Paulo metropolitan region ( RMSP ) . The Campinas Metropolitan area also comprehends a Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) of R$ 70.7 billion ( around U$ 42 billion ) . * Americana * Artur Nogueira * Cosmpolis * Engenheiro Coelho * Holambra * Hortolndia * Indaiatuba * Itatiba * Jaguarina * Monte Mor * Nova Odessa * Paulnia * Pedreira * Santa Brbara d'Oeste * Santo Antnio de Posse * Sumar * Valinhos * Vinhedo The Campinas municipality is also the administrative center of the micro- and meso-regions of the same name . The micro-region includes the RMC ( Metropolitan Region of Campinas ) and the municipality of Elias Fausto ; the meso-region also includes the following municipalities : Agua , Amparo , guas da Prata , guas de Lindia , Caconde , Casa Branca , Divinolndia , Esprito Santo do Pinhal , Estiva Gerbi , Itapira Moji-Mirim , Monte Alegre do Sul , Pedra Bela , Pinhalzinho , Pirassununga , Porto Ferreira , Santa Cruz das Palmeiras , Santo Antnio do Jardim , So Joo da Boa Vista , So Jos do Rio Pardo , So Sebastio da Grama , Serra Negra , Socorro , Tamba , Tapiratiba , Vargem Grande do Sul and Vinhedo . Other cities which are geographically , historically or economically tied to the meso-region of Campinas could be mentioned : Araras , Atibaia , Bragana Paulista , Capivari , Conchal , Iracempolis , Itu , Itupeva , Jarinu , Jundiai , Limeira , Louveira , Mombuca , Morungaba , Piracicaba , Rafard , Rio das Pedras , Salto and Tuiuti. # Economy # Campinas is the richest city in the metropolitan region of Campinas and the 10th richest city in Brazil , showing a gross domestic product ( GDP ) of 36.68 billion reais ( 2010 ) , which represents almost 1% ( 0.998% ) of all Brazilian GDP . Currently , the city concentrates around one third of industrial production of So Paulo state . The paper highlights the high-tech industries Sterling . The region hosts more than 10,000 medium and large companies , many of which are among the 1,000 largest and best in Brazil The petrochemical complex is centered in the Southeastern section , a few miles from Campinas , near the refinery of Petrobras Planalto Paulista ( Replan ) , the largest in Brazil one of the largest in Latin America , and has companies like DuPont The city has several shopping malls , two of the largest being Iguatemi Campinas and Shopping Parque Dom Pedro . Campinas has , within its metropolitan area , the largest cargo airport for import/export , Viracopos International Airport , a significant entity in the international transport of cargo . Campinas ' main economic activities are agriculture ( mainly coffee , sugarcane , and cotton ) , industry ( textiles , motorcycles , cars , machinery , agricultural equipment , food and beverages , chemical industry Campinas also boasts the largest number of high-tech business incubators and industrial parks ( a total of eight ) , such as the CIATEC I and II , Softex , TechnoPark , InCamp , Polis , TechTown of one of the largest oil refineries in Latin America ( 350824 oilbbl of crude per day ) , operated by Petrobras in the neighboring county of Paulnia , has attracted many petrochemical companies to the Campinas area , including DuPont , Rhone-Poulenc , and Royal Dutch Shell . The Brazilian Pr-lcool Program was developed in Campinas : a whole industry based on the use of ethanol as a combustible for motor vehicles , going from a new sucrose-rich sugarcane , to alcohol refineries , a huge distribution system , and , most recently , an internal combustion engine capable of using either gasoline or ethanol . Other examples of Campinas-bred technologies are fiber optics , lasers for telecommunications and medical applications , integrated circuits design and fabrication , satellite environmental monitoring of natural resources , software for agriculture , digital telephone switches , deep-water oil exploration platforms and technologies , biomedical equipment , medical software , genetic engineering and recombinant DNA technologies for food production and pharmaceutics , and food engineering . Because of this , Campinas has been called the Brazilian Silicon Valley . # Socio-economic conditions # Despite vis-a-vis the rest of the country , the average per capita income of little more than US$ 17,700 per year clearly indicates that there are problems . If re-evaluated in terms of PPP ( Purchasing Power Parity ) , Campinas ' average income looks better ( roughly 12,300 USD per year ) . # Culture # The city has always been a cultural center in the State of So Paulo . This has increased greatly with the proliferation of universities . Campinas has three theater houses , a symphony orchestra , ( considered one of the three best of the country ) , now under Principal Conductor Parcival Mdolo and Karl Martin , classical music ensembles , choral groups , 43 movie screens and over a dozen cinemas , dozens of libraries ( including a municipal library ) , art galleries , museums , etc. # Tourism and recreation # Tourist attractions include : * the Bosque dos Jequitibs , an urban preserved wooded area reminiscent of the original rain forest that covered the region in the past : it has a small zoo with local fauna and a natural history 19th century ; its interior is entirely made of jacaranda wood sculptures and works . It was made using a technique called taipa de pilo using clay and rocks &amp;ndash ; it is one of the largest buildings in the world using this construction technique ; * the Central Market , with typical stall stands full of fresh product of the region * the old Central Railway Station , now converted to a cultural center ; * ' ' Centro de Convivncia ' ' , a cultural complex of theater , an open arena for concerts and spectacles , and a plaza where Campinas Symphony Orchestra often plays to the public ; * the ' ' Castelo ' ' ( Castle ) Water Tower , which provides a beautiful view over the downtown ; * the Historical Railway Society of Campinas , which maintains the Anhumas station , a set of steam locomotives and full carriages and which promotes regular trips along a picturesque region dotted with old coffee farms ; * the Lagoa do Taquaral Park , a much-beloved urban lagoon and adjacent wooded park , includes : a planetarium swimming pool , kart racing ( now deactivated ) and model airplane areas , an open concert auditorium , a floating caravel replica , an electric tramway ( streetcar line ) , pedal boats , plus facilities for several types of sports , including a long track for running and walking ; Campinas ' readers of the ' ' Correio Popular ' ' newspaper and the Cosmo Website have voted in July 2007 for the Seven Wonders of Campinas . The mountain region around Campinas has better travel and stay opportunities , such as in the spa cities of Serra Negra and guas de Lindia ; and in Holambra , a rural region which was populated by immigrants from the Netherlands , with an annual flower festival and typical buildings and restaurants . # Sports # Campinas is home to two football clubs nationally recognized : Associao Atltica Ponte Preta and Guarani Futebol Clube , who perform Campineiro derby match that is considered one of the most traditional of the state occurring since 1912 . There is also Red Bull Brasil , which was created in November 2007 and lately has outstanding , albeit amateur . In the story also revealed other clubs , such as Mogiana Sports Club , which was created in June 7 , 1933 and came into bankruptcy in the 60s . The city also has three major venues : Estdio Brinco de Ouro da Princesa , owned by the Guarani , which opened in 1953 and today has a capacity of around 32,341 people , Sport and Recreation Centre in Campinas Dr. Horacio Antonio da Costa ( Cerecamp Stadium or Mogiana Stadium ) , which belongs to the state of So Paulo and was opened in 1940 , besides the Estdio Moiss Lucarelli , owned by Ponte Preta , which was built by its own supporters , and founded in 1948 and has the capacity to 19,722 visitors . It is popular known as Majestoso ( The Majestic One ) , for being the third largest stadium in Brazil as the year of its foundation , smaller only than Pacaembu , in So Paulo and So Janurio , in Rio de Janeiro . The city is still home to several sporting events in other modalities , such held since 1983 by Pioneer Broadcasters Television ( EPTV ) , being divided into two modes ( a 5 km-dedicated to the disabled and wheelchair users , and another 10 km , the normal ) . Campinas also has tradition in the Open Games of the Interior , created in 1936 and competition involving various sports . Four times , hosted the competition ( 1939 , 1945 , 1960 and 1994 ) , and ten times the city came out as the winner of the competition ( 1939 , 1955 , 1956 , 1958 , 1960 , 1971 , 1974 , 1975 , 1978 , 1979 ) , being the third city which has won the most competition . In tennis there is the Tennis Club of Campinas ( CBT ) , which was created in 1913 , offering , in addition to the blocks of the sport , swimming pools , courts for basketball and soccer , as well as rooms suitable for the practice of judo , gymnastics and dance . Club de Regatas Campineiro and Swim ( CCRN ) also provides space for the practice of various types is Jonas Donizette . The city has been through turbulent years in politics lately ; the previous mayor was Pedro Serafim Jnior , a doctor , bachelor in Law , and was elected alderman for the first time in 1996 , and reelected three times . Thanks to the cassation of Demtrio Vilagra and Hlio de Oliveira Santos , he was indirectly elected as mayor . The municipality is subdivided into one main district and four subdistricts , Joaquim Egdio , Sousas , Baro Geraldo and Nova Aparecida . There are also 14 regional administrations . The Secretariat of International Cooperation ( SMCI ) was created on April 28 , 1994 . It is one of the 18 Secretariats of the City Hall of Campinas and it is currently located in that building . Its mains goals are : * the attraction and facilititaion for the arrival of new investments to the city ; * the expansion of the companies activities that are already established in the city ; * the perpetuation of the relations between the city , its international community and partners , such as the Sister-Cities . The City Hall , often through : the identification of national and foreign potentials investors ; keeping systematic contacts with executives in Brazil and abroad , Embassies , Chambers of Commerces and relevant International Organizations ; presenting Campinas to the cities and interested investors . # Mayors # * Orozimbo Maia &amp;ndash ; 1904 , 19081910 , 19261930 * Ruy Hellmeister Novais &amp;ndash ; 1956&amp;ndash ; 1959 , 19641969 * Orestes Qurcia &amp;ndash ; 1969&amp;ndash ; 1972 * Lauro Pricles Gonalves ; 1973&amp;ndash ; 1976 * Francisco Amaral ; 1977&amp;ndash ; 1982 * Jos Roberto Magalhes Teixeira &amp;ndash ; 1983&amp;ndash ; 1988 , 1993&amp;ndash ; 1996 ( died of cancer while in office ) * Francisco Amaral &amp;ndash ; 1977&amp;ndash ; 1982 , 1997&amp;ndash ; 2001 * Jac Bittar &amp;ndash ; 1989-1992 * Antonio da Costa Santos ( ' ' Toninho ' ' ) &amp;ndash ; 2001 ( murdered while in office ) * Izalene Tiene &amp;ndash ; 20012005 * Hlio de Oliveira Santos ( ' ' Dr. Hlio ' ' ) &amp;ndash ; 20052011 ( deposed ) * Demtrio Vilagra &amp;ndash ; 2011(removed) * Pedro Serafim Jnior &amp;ndash ; 2011 * Serafim Jnior &amp;ndash ; 20112012 ( interim ) * Jonas Donizete &amp;ndash ; 2013present # Infrastructure # # Transportation # Campinas is a major transportation and telecommunications hub for the State of So Paulo , as it is located on the major motorways that connect the capital to the Northwest and Northern parts of the State . The city is served by the a Campinas Beltway ( ' ' Anel Virio ' ' ) and the following main motorways : * Rodovia Anhangera * Rodovia dos Bandeirantes * Rodovia Santos Dumont * Rodovia Dom Pedro I * Rodovia Adhemar de Barros * Rodovia Professor Zeferino Vaz * Rodovia Jornalista Francisco Aguirre Proena All these motorways are built according to the highest international standards ( see highway system of So Paulo ) . The Anel Virio Jos Magalhes Teixeira ( SP-038 ) around the city currently interconnects the Anhangera and Dom Pedro I motorways . Campinas has long been a major railway hub , too , although passenger train lines no longer operate there . The city built a light rail line in the early-1990s , but due to low ridership the city is Viracopos International Airport , located 14 km from downtown Campinas and 99 km from the city of So Paulo , and can be reached by three motorways : Santos Dumont , Bandeirantes and Anhanguera . Because of the size and wealth of the regional population around Campinas , and its industrial sector which relies strongly on importation and exportation , the airport today is one of the airport 's operator ( Infraero ) highest priorities to receive investments . Due to the operation of several passenger airlines , such as TAM Airlines , Gol Airlines , Trip Airlines and , more recently , Azul Airlines , which has made Viracopos as its main national hub , the airport is now also the third in the ranking of highest passenger movement in the state of So Paulo . A fast train line is planned for connecting the capital city of So Paulo to the Viracopos airport , thus enhancing its importance in the air transportation in Brazil . A second facility , Campo dos Amarais Airport located 8 km from downtown Campinas , is dedicated to general aviation . # communication today , Campinas was the third city in the world to adopt the technology of the telephone in 1883 , after Chicago and Rio de Janeiro , where 57 machines were installed . Campinas area phone code is 19 . The city is also a major hub for cable , fiber optic , microwave and satellite communication network . COMSAT operates near Campinas one of the largest satellite ground stations in Latin America , and the National Research and Education Network ( Rede Nacional de Pesquisa e Educao ) has a high-capacity point of presence ( POP ) in the city . # Education # Portuguese is the official national language , and thus the primary language taught in schools . But English and Spanish are part of the official high school curriculum . # Universities and colleges # * Unicamp ( Universidade Estadual de Campinas ) ; * INPG Business School ( Instituto Nacional de Ps-Graduao ) - campus in Campinas ; Nationally ranked School by Magazine * PUC-Campinas ( Pontifcia Universidade Catlica de Campinas ) ; * UNIP ( Universidade Paulista ) ; * FACAMP ( Faculdades de Campinas ) ; * IPEP ( Faculdades Integradas IPEP ) ; * UNISAL ( Centro Universitrio Salesiano de So Paulo ) ; * USF ( Universidade So Francisco ) ; * ESAMC ( Escola Superior de Administrao , Marketing e Comunicao ) ; * Universidade Mackenzie ; * FAC ( Faculdades Comunitrias de Campinas ) ; * Faculdades Fleming ; * Faculdade de Odontologia So Leopoldo Mandic. # Technical schools # *ETE Bento Quirino ( Escola Tcnica Estadual Bento Quirino ) *ETEC ( Escola Tcnica de Campinas ) *ETECAP ( Escola Tcnica Estadual Conselheiro Antonio Prado ) *POLI Bentinho ( Colgio Politcnico Bento Quirino ) *COTUCA ( Colgio Tcnico da Universidade de Campinas ) *SENAI ( Servio Nacional de Aprendizagem Industrial ) # Media # Three daily newspapers are published in Campinas , all owned by media company Rede Anhangera de Comunicao : Correio Popular , Dirio do Povo and Notcia J ( a tabloid ) . Several other local newspapers with weekly or monthly circulation are also published . Several magazines are also published in Campinas , the largest one being ' ' Metrpole ' ' , which circulates on ' . The city has also a large number of radio stations as well as several local TV stations , including ' ' TV Universidades ' ' and ' ' Fenix TV ' ' ( both not-for-profit ) , distributed by Net Campinas , the local cable distributor . was the first city in Brazil , outside the capitals of Brazilian states , which received the transmission in digital signal for TV , by EPTV , an affiliate of Rede Globo , on October 3 , 2008 . It currently has the second TV station that also broadcasts the signal by TVB , now an affiliate of Rede Record , since February 2011 ( before SBT , when it began in May 8 , 2010 ) . # Notable people # * Campos Sales ( politician , fourth president of Brazil ) * Carlos Gomes ( opera composer ) * Nelsinho Baptista ( footballer ) * Olavo de Carvalho ( philosopher and writer ) * Lovefoxxx ( singer ) * Rubem Alves ( philosopher and writer ) * Marcelo Damy ( physicist ) * Gilberto de Nucci ( physician and biomedical writer ) * Regina Duarte ( actress ) * Hrcules Florence ( inventor ) * Lus Fabiano &amp;ndash ; ( footballer ) * Carlos Roberto Martins ( entrepreneur ) * Crodowaldo Pavan ( biologist and scientist ) * Jos Aristodemo Pinotti ( physician , former dean of UNICAMP ) * Cassio Raposo do Amaral ( plastic surgeon and researcher ) * Zeferino Vaz ( physician , former dean of UNICAMP ) * Hilda Hilst ( writer ) * Jos Pancetti ( painter ) * Sandy Leah ( singer ) # International relations # # Twin towns Sister cities # Campinas is twinned with : class= wikitable * Blumenau , Santa Catarina , Brazil since 1983 ; * Ubatuba , So Paulo , Brazil since 2007 ; * Belm , Par , Brazil since 2003 ; * Gifu , Japan , since 1982 ; * Cascais , Portugal , since 2012 ; * San Martn de Porres , Bolivia , since 1981 ; * Malito , Italy , since 2006 ; * Fuzhou , China , since 1996 ; * San Diego , USA , since 1995 ; * Indianapolis , USA 1993 ; * Novi Sad , Serbia , since 1989 ; * Concepcin , Chile , since 1979 ; * Daloa , Cte d'Ivoire , since 1982 ; * Asuncin , Paraguay , since 1973 ; * Jericho , Palestine , since 2003 ; * Auroville , India , since 2004 ; * Durban , South Africa , since 2009 ; # Cooperative agreements # Campinas and the following cities have agreed upon sisterhood Protocol of Intentions : class= wikitable * Turin , Italy ; * Fushun , China ; * Jingan , China ; * Bissau , Guinea-Bissau ; * Santa Cruz de la Sierra , Bolvia ; * Chitato , Angola ; * Cotorro , Cuba ; * Fundo , Portugal , since 2012 
 The Chico Heat were a professional independent baseball team operating in Chico , California in the Western Baseball League . They had no operating agreement with any Major League Baseball team . They were created by Chico Heat Professional Baseball LLC , with former supermarket entrepreneur Steve Nettleton and his wife Kathy serving as principal owners . General managers included Bob Linscheid ( who would go to become president of the WBL ) and Jeff Kragel ( now at Chico State University ) and their mascot was the beloved Heater The Dragon ( not to be confused with the Bakersfield Blaze mascot of the same name ) . The team began operations in 1997 . The team immediately won the league championship in their inaugural season and , although they did not win a championship in the four subsequent years , they won the most regular season games in each of the following seasons . They appeared in the championship series in five out of their six seasons in the league . In 2002 , Chico won its second league championship in the league 's and the team , which is located on the campus of California State University , Chico . They were preceded by the Oroville/Chico Red Sox of the minor league 's Class-C Far West League from 1948-1951 and were succeeded by the Chico Outlaws of the independent Golden Baseball League , taking their place in 2005 . The Heat has been the most successful professional baseball franchise in the city 's history . # Remember The Heat Night # On August 11 , 2007 , former Heat majority owner Steve Nettleton and former Heat players were honored as part of a celebration called Remember The Heat Night hosted by the Chico Outlaws as they faced the St. George RoadRunners . The original Heat mascot Heater even made an appearance . The Outlaws won the ball game in front of over 3,500 fans at Nettleton Stadium . # Alumni # Notable Heat alumni who would return to Chico to join the Outlaws organization as either a player , coach or executive include Greg Bicknell , Scott Navarro , Jon Macalutas and Lance Franks. # Year-by-year record # border= 2 cellpadding= 4 cellspacing= 0 style= margin : : 1px #aaa solid ; border-collapse : collapse ; ! Year ! ! League ! ! Affiliation ! ! Record ! ! Finish ! ! Manager ! ! Playoffs # Reference Links # * ( archive.org ) * * * * ( Chico State University website , March 3 , 2000 ) * ( Chico News &amp; Review , April 25 , 2002 ) * ( Chico News &amp; Review , October 17 , 2002 ) * ( Chico News &amp; Review , November 7 , 2002 ) * 
 The Temple Mount and Eretz Yisrael ( Land of Israel ) Faithful Movement is an Orthodox Jewish movement , based in Jerusalem , Israel whose goal is to rebuild the Third Jewish Temple on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem and re-institute the practice of ritual sacrifice . The Movement was founded by former Israel Defense Forces officer and Middle Eastern studies lecturer Gershon Salomon . Members of the movement are referred to as the Temple Mount Faithful . The group was established in 1967 . On October 8 , 1990 , seventeen Palestinians were killed and over 100 others injured by Israeli Border Police in the 1990 Temple Mount riots triggered by an announcement by the Temple Mount Faithful that they were going to lay a cornerstone for a Third Jewish Temple on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem . After the riots the police prohibited Salomon from entering the Temple Mount ; his appeal of that decision was subsequently denied by Israel 's High Court of Justice . The Temple Mount Faithful was the first significant group to advocate the Jewish takeover of the Temple Mount and during with that position . Initially , the group presented its argument largely in terms of nationalistic rather than religious symbolism . In a 1983 interview Salomon stated that whoever controls the Temple Mount has rights over the Land of Israel . Over time , Gershon Salomon developed a more religiously oriented apocalyptic and messianic platform , which , however , was distinctly non-Orthodox in character . Tensions with the more Orthodox elements in the group caused a formal split in 1987 , when a more religiously-oriented splinter group , called the Movement for the Establishment of the Temple was founded . Subsequently the influence of the Temple Mount Faithful among the radical Jewish activists gradually waned , although the group still retains significant visibility . The Temple Mount Faithful functions as a protest movement , but , unlike some other radical Jewish groups , it attempts to operate within Israeli law . Typically , shortly before major Jewish religious festivals , the group requests a permit from the Israeli police to enter the Temple Mount compound and conduct prayer services there . These requests are routinely denied and are followed by High Court , also routinely , permits the group to enter the site but not to pray there ; and such permit is contingent on the Israeli police concluding that the security situation would allow such entry . The police conclude that the entry can not be permitted for security reasons and the Temple Mount Faithful are not allowed to enter the Temple Mount compound . As a result , their demonstrations usually proceed to the Mograbi Gate and are stopped by the police there , outside of the compound . In recent years Salomon increasingly shifted the focus of the Temple Mount Faithful in the apocalyptic and messianic direction , and restoration of the Jewish Temple became one of the central objectives of the movement . During the same period the movement developed close ties with Christian fundamentalist circles and it receives significant financial assistance from some Christian groups , particularly in the U.S. # Footnotes # 
 Ununpentium is the temporary name of a synthetic superheavy element in the periodic table that has the temporary symbol Uup and has the atomic number 115 . It is placed as a heavier homologue to bismuth and the heaviest member of group 15 ( VA ) . It was first observed in 2003 and about 50 atoms of ununpentium have been synthesized to date , with about 25 direct decays of the parent element having been detected . Four consecutive isotopes are currently known , <sup> 287290 </sup> Uup , with <sup> 289 </sup> Uup having the longest measured half-life of 200 ms . On August 27 , 2013 , researchers at GSI from Lund University in Sweden reported confirming the existence of the element . On September 10 , 2013 , researchers from the same research group working in Darmstadt , Germany reported synthesis as well . # History # # Discovery profile # On February 2 , 2004 , synthesis of ununpentium was reported in ' ' Physical Review C ' ' by a team composed of Russian scientists at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research National Laboratory . The team reported that they bombarded americium-243 with calcium-48 ions to produce four atoms of ununpentium . These atoms , they report , decayed by emission of alpha-particles to ununtrium in approximately 100 milliseconds. : + + 3 n + The DubnaLivermore collaboration has strengthened their claim for the discovery of ununpentium by conducting chemical experiments on the decay daughter <sup> 268 </sup> Db . In experiments in June 2004 and December 2005 , the dubnium isotope was successfully identified by milking the Db fraction and measuring any SF activities . Both the half-life and decay mode were confirmed for the proposed <sup> 268 </sup> Db which lends support to the assignment of Z=115 to the parent nuclei . Sergei Dmitriev from the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions ( FLNR ) in Dubna , Russia , has formally put forward their claim of discovery of ununpentium to the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party ( JWP ) . In 2011 , the IUPAC evaluated the DubnaLivermore results and concluded that they did not meet the criteria for discovery . # Naming # Ununpentium is historically known as ' ' eka-bismuth temporary IUPAC systematic element name derived from the digits 115 , where un- represents Latin ' ' unum ' ' . Pent- represents the Greek word for 5 . For more , see systematic element name . # Current and future experiments # The team at Dubna are currently running another series of experiments on the <sup> 243 </sup> Am ( <sup> 48 </sup> Ca , xn ) reaction . They are attempting to complete the 4n excitation function and confirm the data for <sup> 287 </sup> Uup . They are also hoping to identify some decays from the 2n and 5n exit channels . This reaction will run until the Christmas shutdown . The FLNR also have future plans to study light isotopes of element 115 using the reaction <sup> 241 </sup> Am + <sup> 48 </sup> Ca . A team of researchers at Lund University announced they had corroborated the 2004 findings in August 2013 by shooting calcium ions into a thin film of americium . Researchers at the GSI Helmholtz in Darmstadt , Germany reported the successful synthesis of ununpentium using the same reaction just two weeks later Target-projectile combinations # The table below contains various combinations of targets and projectiles which could be used to form compound nuclei with Z=115 . Each entry is a combination for which calculations have provided estimates for cross section yields from various neutron evaporation channels . The channel with the highest expected yield is given . class= wikitable style= text-align:center ! Target ! ! Projectile ! ! CN ! ! Attempt result ! <sup> 208 </sup> Pb - ! <sup> 232 </sup> Th - ! <sup> 238 </sup> U - ! <sup> 237 </sup> Np - ! <sup> 244 </sup> Pu - ! <sup> 243 </sup> Am - ! <sup> 241 </sup> Am - ! <sup> 248 </sup> Cm - ! <sup> 249 </sup> Bk - ! <sup> 249 </sup> Cf # Hot fusion # Hot fusion reactions are processes that create compound nuclei at high excitation energy ( 4050 MeV , therefore hot ) , leading to a reduced probability of survival from fission . The excited nucleus then decays to the ground state via the emission of 35 neutrons . Fusion reactions utilizing <sup> 48 </sup> Ca nuclei usually produce and are sometimes referred to as warm fusion reactions . This leads , in part , to relatively high yields from these reactions . ; <sup> 238 </sup> U ( <sup> 51 </sup> V , ' ' x ' ' n ) <sup> 289 ' ' x ' ' </sup> Uup There are strong indications that this reaction was performed in late 2004 as part of a uranium(IV) fluoride target test at the GSI . No reports have been published , suggesting that no product atoms were detected , as anticipated by the team . ; <sup> 243 </sup> Am ( <sup> 48 </sup> Ca , ' ' x ' ' n ) <sup> 291 ' ' x ' ' </sup> Uup ( x=2,3,4 ) This reaction was first performed by the team in Dubna in JulyAugust 2003 . In two separate runs , they were able to detect 3 atoms of <sup> 288 </sup> Uup and a single atom of <sup> 287 </sup> Uup . The reaction was studied further in June 2004 in an attempt to isolate the descendant <sup> 268 </sup> Db from the <sup> 288 </sup> Uup , 15 SF decays were measured with a lifetime consistent with <sup> 268 </sup> Db . In order to prove that the decays were from dubnium-268 , the team repeated the reaction in August 2005 and separated the +4 and +5 fractions and further separated the +5 fractions into tantalum-like and niobium-like ones . Five SF activities were observed , all occurring in the +5 fractions and none in the tantalum-like fractions , proving that the product was indeed isotopes of dubnium . In a series of experiments between October 2010 February 2011 , scientists at the FLNR studied this reaction at a range of excitation energies . They were able to detect 21 atoms of <sup> 288 </sup> Uup and one atom of <sup> 289 </sup> Uup , from the 2n exit channel . This latter result was used to support the synthesis of ununseptium . The 3n excitation function was completed with a maximum at 8 pb . The data was consistent with that found in the first experiments in 2003. # Isotopes and nuclear properties # # Chemical properties # # Extrapolated chemical properties # # #Oxidation states# the 7p series of chemical elements and the heaviest member of group 15 ( VA ) in the Periodic Table , below bismuth . In this group , each member is known to portray the group oxidation state of +V but with differing stability . For nitrogen , the +V state is very difficult to achieve due to the lack of low-lying d-orbitals and the inability of the small nitrogen atom to accommodate five ligands . The +V state is well represented for phosphorus , arsenic , and antimony . However , for bismuth it is rare due to the reluctance of the 6s <sup> 2 </sup> electrons to participate in bonding . This effect is known as the inert pair effect and is commonly linked to relativistic stabilisation of the 6s-orbitals . It is expected that ununpentium will continue this trend and portray only +III and +I oxidation states . Nitrogen(I) and bismuth(I) are known but rare and ununpentium(I) is likely to show some unique properties . Because of spin-orbit coupling , flerovium may display closed-shell or noble gas-like properties ; if this is the case , ununpentium will likely <sup> + </sup> will have the same electron configuration as flerovium. # Chemistry # Ununpentium should display eka-bismuth chemical properties and should therefore form a sesquioxide , Uup <sub> 2 </sub> Oxygen # Stability # All the reported above isotopes of element 115 , obtained by nuclear collisions of lighter nuclei , are severely neutron-deficient , because the proportion of neutrons to protons needed for maximum stability increases with atomic number . The most stable isotope will probably be <sup> 299 </sup> Uup , with 184 neutrons , a known magic closed-shell number conferring exceptional stability , making it ( with one further proton outside the magic number of 114 protons ) both the chemical and the nuclear homolog of <sup> 209 </sup> Bi ; but the technology required to add the required neutrons presently does not exist . This is because no known combination of target and projectile can result in the required neutrons . It has been suggested that such a neutron-rich isotope could be formed by quasifission ( fusion followed by fission ) of a massive nucleus , multi-nucleon transfer reactions in collisions of actinide nuclei , or this would depend on the stability of the parent nuclei towards spontaneous fission ) . 
 In Greek mythology , the Meliae ( ; ' ' Meliai ' ' or ' ' Meliades ' ' ) were nymphs of the ash tree , whose name they shared . They appeared from the drops of blood spilled when Cronus castrated Uranus , according to Hesiod , ' ' Theogony ' ' 187 . From the same blood sprang the Erinyes , suggesting perhaps that the ash-tree nymphs represented the Fates in milder guise ( Graves 6.4 ) , and the Giants . From the Meliae sprang the race of mankind of the Age of Bronze . # Description # The Meliae belong to a class of sisterhoods whose nature is to appear collectively and who are invoked in the plural , though genealogical myths , especially in Hesiod , give them individual names , such as Melia , but these are quite clearly secondary and carry no great weight ( Burkert 1985 III.3.2 ) . The Melia thus singled out is one of these daughters of Oceanus . By her brother the river-god Inachus , she became the mother of Io , Phoroneus , Aegialeus she was the mother of Amycus by Poseidon , as the Olympian representative of Oceanus . Many species of ' ' Fraxinus ' ' , the ash trees , exude a sugary substance , which the ancient Greeks called ' ' mli ' ' , honey . The species of ash in the mountains of Greece is the Manna-ash ( ' ' Fraxinus ornus ' ' ) . The Meliae were nurses of the infant Zeus in the Cretan cave of Dikte , according to Callimachus , ' ' Hymn to Zeus ' ' . They fed him honey . Of manna , the ash-tree sugar , the standard 19th-century US pharmacopeia , ' ' The Dispensatory of the United States of America ' ' ( 14th edition , Philadelphia , 1878 ) said : Fermented honey preceded wine as an entheogen in the Aegean world . # Meliae # The Meliai were perhaps the same as the honey-nymph ( meliai ) nurses of the god Zeus , Ida and Adrasteia . The manna meli of the ash and the honey of bees were thought to be related and being regarded 's ' ' Theogony ' ' they were born aside the Erinyes , avengers of the castration of Uranus , and the Gigantes . In Hesiod appear to be the Kouretes-protectors of the baby Zeus . As children born of the castration , it would be proper that they are brothers should play a role in the downfall of Cronus , performer of the crime . They were an overly aggressive race who incurred the wrath of Zeus and were ruined in the flood of the Great Deluge . # Argive genealogy in Greek mythology # 
 : ' ' This article is about the Greek artist . For Eirene , the personification of peace and wealth , one of the Horae , see Horae ' ' . Eirene or Irene was an ancient Greek artist described by Pliny the Elder in the 1st century . She was the daughter of a painter , and created an image of a girl that was housed at Eleusis . During the Renaissance , Boccaccio , a 14th-century humanist , included Eirene in ' ' De mulieribus claris ' ' ( Latin for ' ' On Famous Women ' ' ) . However , in this telling Boccaccio apparently conflated many of the women described by Pliny and attributed many more works to Eirene . Some other paintings he credits to Eirene are an older Calypso , the gladiator Theodorus , and a famous dancer called Alcisthenes. 
 Infobox settlement New London is a seaport city and a port of entry on the northeast coast of the United States . It is located at the mouth of the Thames River in New London County , southeastern Connecticut . New London is located about 107 mi from Boston , Massachusetts , 56 mi from Providence , Rhode Island , 85 mi from New Bedford , Massachusetts , and about 128 mi from New York City . For several decades beginning in the early 19th century , New London was the world 's third busiest whaling port after New Bedford , Massachusetts , and Nantucket . The wealth that whaling brought into the city furnished the capital to fund much of the city 's present architecture . New London subsequently became home to other shipping and manufacturing industries , but has gradually lost its commercial and industrial heart . The city is home to Connecticut College , Mitchell College , the United States Coast Guard Academy , and The Williams School . New London Harbor is home port to the U.S. Coast Guard Cutter ' ' ' ' ' ' . New London had a population of 27,620 at the 2010 census . The Norwich-New London metropolitan area ( NECTA ) includes twenty-one towns and 274,055 people . # History # The area was called Nameaug by the Pequot Indians . John Winthrop , Jr . founded the first English settlement here in 1646 , making it about the 13th town settled in Connecticut . Inhabitants informally named it Pequot after the tribe . The Connecticut General Assembly wanted to name the town Faire Harbour , but the citizens protested , declaring that they would prefer it to be called Nameaug . The legislature relented , and on March 10 , 1658 the town was officially named after London , England . The harbor was considered to be the best deep water harbor on Long Island Sound , and consequently New London became a base of American naval operations during the Revolutionary War . Famous New Londoners during the American Revolution include Nathan Hale , William Coit , Richard Douglass , Thomas &amp; Nathaniel Shaw , Gen. Samuel Parsons , printer Timothy Green , Reverend Seabury . New London 6 , 1781 in the Battle of Groton Heights , by Norwich native Benedict Arnold in an attempt to destroy the Revolutionary privateer fleet and supplies of goods and naval stores within the city . It is often noted that this raid on New London and Groton was to divert General Washington and the French Army under Rochambeau from their march on Yorktown , Virginia . The main defensive fort for New London , Fort Griswold , located across the Thames River in Groton , was well known to Arnold , who sold its secrets to the British fleet so they could avoid its artillery fire . After overrunning New London 's Fort Trumbull , Ft . Griswold was attacked by the British , who suffered great casualties before eventually storming the fort and slaughtering many of the militia who defended the fort . All told more than 52 British soldiers and 83 militia were killed and more than 142 British and 39 militia were wounded , many mortally . New London suffered over 6 militia killed and 24 wounded while Arnold and the British and Hessian raiding party suffered an Richard Douglass House on Green Street Image:Park next to The Day newspaper IMG1029.JPGSmall park next to ' ' New London Day ' ' newspaper File:Citizen 's Bank in New London , CT.JPGCitizen 's Bank in New London File:Another view of downtown New London , CT.JPGAnother view of downtown New London Image : NewLondonCT StateSt 1920. jpgState Street ( ca. 1920 ) </gallery> Connecticut 's independent legislature , in its January session of 1784 , made New London one of the first two cities ( along with New Haven ) brought from ' ' de facto ' ' to formalized incorporations . For several decades beginning in the early 19th century , New London was the second busiest whaling port after New Bedford , Massachusetts in the world . The wealth that whaling brought into the city furnished the capital to fund much of the city 's present architecture . The New Haven and New London Railroad connected New London by rail to New Haven and points beyond by the 1850s . The Springfield and New London Railroad connected New London to Springfield , Massachusetts by the 1870s . Several military installations have been part of New London 's history . Most of these have been located at Fort Trumbull . The first Fort Trumbull was an earthwork built 1775-1777 that took part in the Revolutionary War . The second Fort Trumbull was built 1839-1852 and still stands . By 1910 the fort 's defensive function had been superseded by the new forts of the Endicott Program , primarily located on Fishers Island . The fort was turned over to the Revenue Cutter Service and became the Revenue Cutter Academy . The Revenue Cutter Service was merged into the United States Coast Guard in 1915 , and the Academy relocated to its current site in 1932 . During World War II the Merchant Marine Officers Training School was located at Fort Trumbull . From 1950 to 1990 Fort Trumbull was the location for the Naval Underwater Sound Laboratory , which developed sonar and related systems for US Navy submarines . In 1990 the Sound Laboratory was merged with the Naval Underwater Systems Center in Newport , Rhode Island , and in 1996 the New London facility was closed . Although the Naval Submarine were stationed in New London from 1951 to 1991 . The submarine tender ' ' Fulton ' ' and Submarine Squadron Ten were at State Pier during this time . Squadron Ten was usually composed of ten submarines and was the first all-nuclear submarine squadron . In the 1990s State Pier was rebuilt as a container terminal . The family of Nobel laureate and Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Eugene O'Neill ( 1888-1953 ) , and most of his own first 26 years , were intimately connected to New London . He lived for years there , and as an adult was employed and wrote his first seven or eight plays in the city . A major O'Neill archive is located at Connecticut College , and a family home there is a museum and registered national historic landmark operated by the ' ' Eugene O'Neill Theater Center ' ' . Dutch 's Tavern on Green Street was a favorite watering hole of Eugene O'Neill and still stands today . # Towns created from New London # When established , New London originally had a larger land area . Towns set off since include Groton ) created from a part of Groton in 1836 * Montville in 1786 ** Salem created from parts of Montville , Colchester and Lyme in 1819 * Waterford in 1801 ** East Lyme created from parts of Waterford and Lyme in 1839 * Fishers Island officially left Connecticut and became part of New York in 1879. # Geography # In terms of land area , New London is one of the smallest cities in Connecticut . Of the whole 10.76 sqmi , nearly half is water ; 5.54 sqmi is land . The town and city of New London are coextensive . Between 1705 and 1801 sections of the original town were ceded to form newer towns . The towns of Groton , Ledyard , Montville , and Waterford ; and portions of Salem and East Lyme ; now occupy what had earlier been the outlying area of New London . New London is bounded on the west and north by the town of Waterford , on the east by the Thames River and Groton , and on the south by Long Island Sound . The geographic coordinates of the communities # *Downtown *Ocean Beach Other minor communities and geographic features are : Bates Woods Park , Fort Trumbull , Glenwood Park , Green 's Harbor Beach , Mitchell 's Woods , Pequot Colony , Riverside Park , Old Town Mill . # Climate # New London , like the rest of coastal Connecticut lies in the transition between a humid continental climate ( Kppen climate classification : ' ' Dfa ' ' ) and humid subtropical climate ( Kppen ' ' Cfa ' ' ) , as is typical for much of the Tri-State Area ( NY/NJ/CT ) . New London enjoys a sunny climate , averaging 2600 hours of sunshine annually . New London is the mildest large city in Connecticut in winter . In the summer months the southerly flow from subtropical high pressure ( the Atlantic/Bermuda High ) often creates hot and humid weather . Daytime heating produces occasional thunderstorms with heavy , but brief downpours . Spring and Fall is mild in New London - with daytime highs in the 55 to 70 F range and lows in the 40 to 50 F range . The compared to areas inland . The first frost in the New London area is normally not until early November - almost three weeks later than parts of northern Connecticut . Winters are cool to cold with a mix of rainfall and snowfall , or mixed precipitation . New London normally sees less than 25 days annually with snow cover . In mid-winter , the differences in low temperatures between areas along the coastline and areas well inland can be large at times - often as much as 15 F. Although infrequent , tropical cyclones ( hurricanes/tropical storms ) have struck Connecticut and the New London metropolitan area . Hurricane landfalls have occurred along the Connecticut coast in 1903 , 1938 , 1944 , 1954 ( Carol ) , 1960 ( Donna ) , 1985 ( Gloria ) . Tropical Storm Irene ( 2011 ) also caused moderate damage along the Connecticut coast , as did Hurricane Sandy ( which made landfall in New Jersey ) in 2012 . Coastal Connecticut ( including New London ) is the broad transition zone where so-called subtropical indicator plants and other broadleaf evergreens can successfully with freeze - about the same as Baltimore , Maryland . As such , Southern Magnolias , Needle Palms , Windmill palm , Loblolly Pines , and Crape Myrtles are grown in private and public gardens . Like much of coastal Connecticut/Long Island , NY , the growing season in New London is quite long , averaging 210 days from April 8 to November 5 . **25;13692;div </div> # Demographics # # 2006+ estimates # According to the 20062008 American Community Survey , non-Hispanic whites made up 54.6% of New London 's population . Non-Hispanic blacks made up 14.0% of the population . Asians of non-Hispanic origin made up 4.6% of the city 's population . Multiracial individuals of non-Hispanic origin made up 4.3% of the population ; people of mixed black and white ancestry made up 1.7% of the population . In addition , people of mixed black and Native American ancestry made up 1.0% of the population . People of mixed white and Native American ancestry made up 0.7% of the population ; those of mixed white and Asian ancestry made up 0.4% of the populace . Hispanics and 13.8% were Puerto Rican . The top five largest European ancestry groups were Italian ( 10.5% ) , Irish ( 9.7% ) , German ( 7.4% ) , English ( 6.8% ) and Polish ( 5.0% ) According to the survey , 74.4% of people over the age of 5 spoke only English at home . Approximately 16.0% of the population spoke Spanish at home . In 2012 , the population reached 27,700 . The median household income was $44,100 , with 20% of the population below the poverty line . # 2000 census # As of the census of 2000 , there were 25,671 people , 10,181 households , and 5,385 families residing in the city . The population density was 4635.5 /sqmi . There were 11,560 housing units at an average density of 2087.4 /sqmi . The racial makeup of the city was 63.49% White , 19.71% Hispanic or Latino of any race , 18.64% African American , 0.88% Native American , 2.12% Asian , 0.08% Pacific Islander , 9.13% from other races , and 5.67% from two or more races . There were 10,181 households out of which them , 30.4% were married couples living together , 17.8% had a female householder with no husband present , and 47.1% were non-families. 37.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 3.00 . In the city the population was spread out with 22.8% under the age of 18 , 17.6% from 18 to 24 , 29.6% from 25 to 44 , 17.9% from 45 to 64 , and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 31 years . For every 100 females there were 95.5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 93.8 males . The median income for a household in the city was $33,809 , and the median income for a family was $38,942 . Males had a median income of $31,405 versus $25,426 for females . The per capita income for the city was $18,437 . About 13.4% of families and 15.8% of the population were below 18 and 11.4% of those age 65 or over . # Infrastructure # # Transportation # By land , New London is almost exactly midway between New York City and Boston . The major seaboard interstate highway , I-95 , passes through the city , and New London 's Amtrak station is on the passenger rail Northeast Corridor . The city of Worcester , Massachusetts is 74 mi northward , principally via Interstate 395 , and the Connecticut capital , Hartford , is 53 mi to the northwest and reachable via several different state highways ( principally CT-2 and CT-9 ) . New Haven is 47 mi to the west along I-95 . New London Union Station is served by Amtrak 's Northeast Regional and Acela Express regional rail services , plus Shore Line East ( SLE ) commuter rail service . Downtown New London is also served by local taxi companies , regional Southeast Area Transit buses , interstate Greyhound Lines buses , the Cross Sound Ferry to Long Island , the Fishers Island , and in summer by the Block Island ferry . In 2010 , the Estuary Transit center and Old Saybrook . The Groton-New London Airport is located in neighboring Groton , and two major airports T. F. Green and Bradley International Airport are within 75 minutes driving time , as is the smaller Tweed New Haven Regional Airport . Rail freight is by the Providence &amp; Worcester Railroad and the New England Central Railroad . Seagoing cargo at the State Pier is handled by . New London is also occasionally visited by cruise ships . # Fire department # The city of New London has 56 firefighters and EMTs in the New London Fire Department(NLFD) . Established in 1786 , the NLFD currently operates out of 3 Fire Stations , located throughout the city , under the command of a Battalion Chief per shift . The New London Fire Department also operates a fire apparatus fleet of 3 Engines , 2 Trucks , 2 Ambulances , 1 Fire Investigation Unit , 1 Canteen Unit , and several other special , support , and reserve units . The NLFD currently responds to approximately 6,600 emergency calls annually . # #Fire station locations and apparatus# # # Government # to Strong Mayor-Council after a charter revision . Distinct town and city government structures formerly existed , and technically continue . However , they now govern exactly the same territory , and have elections on the same ballot on Election Day in November , the first Tuesday after the first Monday , of odd-numbered years ; the officials of town and city interact essentially as do the officials of a single town or city who have different but related responsibilities and powers . # Recent policy challenges # ; Jordan v. New London ( 2000 ) On August 23 , 2000 , the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit decided in ' ' Jordan v. New London ' ' that preventing frequent job turnover caused by hiring overqualified applicants was legal grounds for disqualifying an applicant seeking a job with the New London Police . The plaintiff , Robert Jordan , took the Wonderlic Personnel Test as part of the city 's application process ; his score on that test was above the range required by the police department to legally narrow down the list of who qualify According to the city , Jordan was too smart to join the police , since in their experience , his intelligence correlated with an increased risk of job dissatisfaction , which in turn led to increased costs in hiring and training . ; Kelo v. New London ( 2005 ) On February 22 , 2005 , the United States Supreme Court , in a 5-4 vote , decided in ' ' Kelo v. City of New London ' ' , that the city may seize privately owned real property under eminent domain so that it could be used for private economic development , deciding the tax revenue from the private development satisfied the requirement for public interest for eminent domain . The case was centered around pharmaceutical company Pfizer 's efforts to construct a mixed-use complex that included a condominium , hotel , conference center , health club and stores on the site of private homes in New London 's Fort Trumbull neighborhood , in conjunction with a research facility Pfizer was building nearby . Local homeowners including Susette Kelo challenged this development proposal on the grounds that their properties were , which was inconsistent with the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution 's Bill of Rights : ... nor shall private property be taken for public use , without just compensation . In spite of the city 's legal victory , the project never got off the ground . The city 's chosen redeveloper was not able to get financing for the project . Even though the city expended over eighty million dollars acquiring and demolishing homes , the area where the taken homes once stood is now vacant . In November , 2009 , Pfizer announced that they instead were closing their facility adjacent to the site and moving those operations across the Thames River to their site in Groton . The New London campus was sold to General Dynamics in 2010 . Today , New London Main Street , non-profit civic organization founded in 1998 devoted to the New London Historic Waterfront District , runs programs that promote the district 's cultural and economic vitality and also campaigns for various initiatives to keep and enhance the district 's streetscapes . All of the group 's efforts are put toward # # Music # New London has a respected symphony orchestra , a military wind ensemble , and a local tradition of R&amp;B and rock-n-roll . Notable artists and ensembles include : * , founded in 1946 and led by Toshiyuki Shimada , who is also conductor of the Yale Symphony Orchestra in New Haven . * The Idlers of the United States Coast Guard Academy , an all-male vocal group specializing in sea chantys and patriotic music . * United States Coast Guard Band , founded in 1925 with the assistance of John Philip Sousa . Stationed at the United States Coast Guard Academy and attracting talented musicians from all parts of the country , the band is the official musical representative of the nation 's oldest continuous seagoing service . * The Can Kickers , a folk punk band . * Dawn Robinson , a R&amp;B singer . # Sites of interest # <gallery> Image:Gold Star Bridge at Sunset.JPGNew London from the harbor Image:Waterfront in New London , CT.JPGFrom the waterfront in New London ferry service is available to Fishers Island Image:Downtown New London ( 2009 ) . JPGDowntown , CT.JPGRoyal Hotel downtown Image:Military monument in New London , CT.JPGCivil War Monument in downtown New London Image:Second Congregational Church United Church of Christ , New London , CT , USA.jpgSecond Cong . Church , Broad St. </gallery> * Ye Antientist Burial Ground * Hygienic Arts * Connecticut College Arboretum * Flock Theatre * Fort Griswold ( Groton ) * Fort Trumbull * Garde Arts Center * Joshua Hempsted House ( 1678 ) * List of Registered Historic Places in New London * Lyman Allyn Art Museum * Monte Cristo Cottage &amp; Eugene O'Neill Theater Center ( Waterford ) * Ocean Beach Park * Olde Town Mill ( 1650 ) * Second Congregational Church ( 1835 ) * New London County Historical Society Shaw-Perkins Mansion ( 1758 ) * New London Maritime Society U.S. Custom House ( 1833 ) , landing site of ' ' Amistad ' ' ( 1839 ) *Winthrop Mill *Fishers Island ( 7 miles off the coast of New London , but currently part of New York ) . # Notable people # * Eliphalet Adams , clergyman * Theresa Andrews , winner of 2 Olympic gold the United States Navy * James Avery , politician and military commander * Nathan Belcher , congressman * Augustus Brandegee , judge , congressman , abolitionist * Frank B. Brandegee , congressman and senator * Amy Brenneman , actress * Henry Burbeck , brigadier general * Daniel Burrows , congressman * Magic Dick , musician * David Dorfman , choreographer * Richard Douglass , cooper and soldier * Doug DuBose , NFL player * Larry Elgart , musician * John Ellis , baseball player * Richard P. Freeman , congressman * L. Patrick Gray , lawyer and Watergate figure * Timothy Green , official printer for the colony of Connecticut ; first of the Green printing dynasty * Nathan Hale , schoolmaster and patriot * Doc Hammer , multimedium artist and co-creator of the Venture Brothers * Matt Harvey , MLB pitcher for the New York Mets * Glenne Headly , actress * Barkley L. Hendricks , painter * Sarah Kemble Knight , diarist , teacher and businesswoman * John Law , congressman * Bryan F. Mahan , congressman * Richard Mansfield , actor * John McCain , senator and Republican when his father , John S. McCain , Jr. , worked at the naval submarine base ) * Thomas Miner , diarist * James O'Neill , actor , father of Eugene O'Neill * Eugene O'Neill , playwright * Walter Palmer , founder * Elias Perkins , congressman * Edward Clark Potter , sculptor * Art Quimby , basketball player * Jordan Reed , Tight End for the Washington Redskins * Dawn Robinson , singer * John Rogers , 17th and 18th century religious leader , founder of the Rogerenes * Moses Rogers , captain of first steam-powered ship to cross the Atlantic * Dudley Saltonstall , naval officer * Thomas R. Sargent III , Vice Admiral in the United States Coast Guard * Samuel Seabury , bishop * Benjamin Stark , senator * Dana Suesse , composer , songwriter , musician * Ron Suresha , author and editor * Casandra Ventura , singer * John T. Wait , former U.S. Representative for Connecticut * Thomas M. Waller Mayor of New London and 51st Governor of Connecticut * John Winthrop , the Younger , statesman and founder 
 In Vodou , and especially in Haiti , Agw ( also spelt Goue , Agoueh , or Agive ) , is a loa who rules over the sea , fish , and aquatic plants , as well as the patron loa of fishermen and sailors . He is considered to be married to Erzulie Freda and La Sirene . He goes by several titles , including ' ' koki la me ' ' ( Shell of the Sea ) , ' ' koki dore ' ' ( Golden Shell ) , The Angel in the Mirror , The Eel , and The Tadpole in the Pond . A recent appearance of Agw on stage was Once On This Island where he was one of the four gods : Asaka Mother of Earth , Agw God of Water , Erzulie Goddess of Love and Papa G ( Papa Ghede ) Demon of Death # Agwe Family # # Rada # Met Agwe is the Loa of direction . His territory is the winds and the currents , waves and depths of the oceans . He helps sailors find their guidance whenever an individual needs them in times of turmoil , loss , or indecision . He lives in a glorious palace under the seas . Patron of sailors , sea travelers and pirates . ( Master Agwe ) Agwe Arroyo or Agwe Tawoyo / Agwe ' Woyo ( Agwe of the Streams ) is captain of ' ' Immamou ' ' , the ship that carries the dead to ' ' Guinee ' ' , the afterlife . He cries salt-water tears for the departed . He assisted the souls of those that suffered crimes against humanity during the trans-atlantic slave trade . Papa Agwe is envisioned as a handsome African man with green eyes , sometimes lighter skin , often wearing a naval officer 's or sailor 's uniform . He is considered to be a gentleman who commands respect and embodies several ideals of masculinity including bravery , reserve and provision . # Petro # Agwe Flambeau ( Agwe of the Torch ) is from a realm of boiling water , like a hot springs or an underwater volcanic eruption . He is appealed to give rivals bad to avoid or remove bad luck at sea , to avoid sinking or drowning , or to stop or prevent rough seas and bad storms . Agwe Ge-Rouge ( Agwe of the Red Eyes ) # Worship # His colours are blue , white , and occasionally sea-green or brown . His ' ' veve ' ' ( ritual symbol ) is a boat with sails . His symbols are painted shells , painted oars , and sealife like the Seahorse and Starfish . He is syncretised with the Catholic Saint Ulrich of Augsburg and occasionally the archangel Raphael , both of whom are depicted holding fish . His holy day is Thursday . He is saluted or signaled with blowing on a conch-shell and/or volleys of gunfire . When he possesses a devotee he often pushes himself around the temple on a chair ( his boat ) with a cane ( his oar ) , shouting naval commands and saluting members of the congregation . His ' ' chevals ' ' ( horses , or possessed devotees ) need to be kept moist with wet sponges or damp towels and where Agwe belongs . # Offerings # Small offerings to Agwe are poured or dropped overboard in deep ocean water . Large offerings to Agwe are left on constructed rafts ( ' ' barques d'Agwe ' ' ) which are floated or towed out to sea . If the raft sinks , it is accepted ; if it returns to shore it is rejected . After the offering is left , the supplicants can not look back at that place or it will anger Agwe . ' ' Chevals ' ' must be prevented from falling or leaping into the sea and drowning , as it would offend Agwe . Nothing toxic ( lead pipes , cement bags , garbage ) must be used to weigh down the raft ; if it will hurt or pollute the sea , it will anger Agwe . His offerings include : *Beverages : champagne , naval rum , or anisette . Coffee with sugar and cream . *Items : mirrors , a telescope , toy ships or scale ship models , oars or paddles , sea shells , turquoise beads or jewelry , fish-shaped uniforms or medals . *Food : Savoury exotic foods , melon , boiled cornmeal , rice cooked in coconut milk , rice cooked with lima beans , boiled or fried ripe bananas , white cake , cane syrup , almond oil , olive oil . *Sacrificial Animals : White roosters , male ducks , and white rams or goats whose wool has been dyed with indigo . They are afterwards prepared , cooked , and then placed in serving dishes or on plates as a sacrifice ( as King of the Seas , he does n't get hot food at home ) . He is rarely offered seafood . If it is offered ( perhaps to celebrate a bountiful year , good fortune , or a joyous occasion ) it must be prepared and then cooked in a pan or oven . Then ( to be fit for the table of the King of the Sea ) it must be served on a white china dish with blue patterns . 
 county = Live Oak County state = Texas seal = founded = 1856 seat wl= George West largest city wl = George West areatotalsqmi =1079 arealandsqmi =1040 areawatersqmi =39 area percentage = 3.6% census yr = 2010 pop = 11531 densitykm2 =5 ex image = Live oak courthouse.jpg ex image size = 250 ex image cap =The Live Oak County Courthouse in George West web = www.co.live-oak.tx.us Live Oak County is a county located in the U.S. state of Texas . As of the 2010 census , its population was 11,531 . Its county seat is George West . # Geography # According to the U.S. Census Bureau , the county has a total area of , of which is land and ( 3.6% ) is water . # Major highways # * * ** * ** * * * * * # Adjacent counties # *Karnes County ( northeast ) *Bee County ( east ) *San Patricio County ( southeast ) *Jim Wells County ( south ) *Duval County ( southwest ) *McMullen County ( west ) *Atascosa County ( northwest ) # Demographics # Retrieved December census of 2000 , there were 12,309 people , 4,230 households , and 3,070 families residing in the county . The population density was 12 people per square mile ( 5/km ) . There were 6,196 housing units at an average density of 6 per square mile ( 2/km ) . The racial makeup of the county was 87.28% White , 2.45% Black or African American , 0.41% Native American , 0.19% Asian , 0.02% Pacific Islander , 7.72% from other races , and 1.94% from two or more races . 38.05% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . There were 4,230 households out of which 30.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 60.10% were married couples living together , 8.70% had a female householder with no husband present , and 27.40% were non-families. 23.90% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.00 . In the county , the population was spread out with to 24 , 27.10% from 25 to 44 , 25.10% from 45 to 64 , and 16.00% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 39 years . For every 100 females there were 122.20 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 129.80 males . The median income for a household in the county was $32,057 , and the median income for a family was $38,235 . Males had a median income of $30,061 versus $19,665 for females . The per capita income for the county was $15,886 . About 14.10% of families and 16.50% of the population were below the poverty line , including 22.20% of those under age 18 and 11.70% of those age 65 or over . # Government and infrastructure # The Federal Bureau of Prisons Federal Correctional Institution , Three Rivers is located in unincorporated Live Oak County , near Three Rivers . # Communities # *Choke Canyon Reservoir *George West *Lebanon *Pernitas Point *Ray Point *Three Rivers 
 A detergent is a surfactant or a mixture of surfactants with cleaning properties in dilute solutions . These substances are usually alkylbenzenesulfonates , a family of compounds that are similar to soap but are more soluble in hard water , because the polar sulfonate ( of detergents ) is less likely than the polar carboxyl ( of soap ) to bind to calcium and other ions found in hard water . In most household contexts , the term ' ' detergent ' ' by itself refers specifically to ' ' laundry detergent ' ' or ' ' dish detergent ' ' , as opposed to ' ' hand soap ' ' or other types of cleaning agents . Detergents are commonly available as powders or concentrated solutions . Detergents , like soaps , work because they are amphiphilic : partly hydrophilic ( polar ) and partly hydrophobic ( non-polar ) . Their dual nature facilitates the mixture of hydrophobic compounds ( like oil and grease ) with water . Because air is not hydrophilic , detergents are also foaming agents to varying degrees . # Chemical classification of depending on the electrical charge of the surfactants. # Anionic detergents # Typical anionic detergents are alkylbenzenesulfonates . The alkylbenzene portion of these anions is lipophilic and the sulfonate is hydrophilic . Two different varieties have been popularized , those with branched alkyl groups and those with linear alkyl groups . The former were largely phased out in economically advanced societies because they are poorly biodegradable . An estimated 6 billion kilograms of anionic detergents are produced annually for domestic markets . Bile acids , such as deoxycholic acid ( DOC ) , are anionic detergents produced by the liver to aid in digestion and absorption of fats and oils . # Cationic detergents # Cationic detergents are similar to the anionic ones , with a hydrophobic component , but , instead of the anionic sulfonate group , the cationic surfactants have quaternary ammonium as the polar end . The ammonium center is positively charged . # Non-ionic and zwitterionic detergents # Non-ionic detergents are characterized by their uncharged , hydrophilic headgroups . Typical non-ionic detergents are based on polyoxyethylene or a glycoside . Common examples of the former include Tween are also known as ethoxylates or PEGylates and their metabolites , nonylphenol . Glycosides have a sugar as their uncharged hydrophilic headgroup . Examples include octyl thioglucoside and maltosides . HEGA and MEGA series detergents are similar , possessing a sugar alcohol as headgroup . Zwitterionic detergents possess a net zero charge arising from the presence of equal numbers of +1 and 1 charged chemical groups . Examples include CHAPS . See surfactants for more applications . # Major applications of detergents # # Laundry detergents # One of the largest applications of detergents is for washing clothes . The formulations are complex , reflecting the diverse demands of the application and the highly competitive consumer market . In general , laundry detergents contain water softeners , surfactants , bleach , enzymes , brighteners , fragrances , and many other agents . The formulation is strongly affected by the temperature of the cleaning water and varies from country to country . # Fuel additives # Both carburetors and fuel injector components of Otto engines benefit from detergents in the fuels to prevent fouling . Concentrations are about 300 ppm . Typical **30;4944;TOOLONG # Biological Reagent # Reagent grade detergents are employed for the isolation and purification of integral membrane proteins found in biological cells . Advancements in the purity and sophistication of detergents have facilitated structural and biophysical characterization of important membrane proteins such as ion channels , transporters , signaling receptors , and photosystem II . # Soapless soap # Soapless soap refers to a soapfree liquid cleanser with a slightly acidic pH . Soapless soaps are used in an array of products . 
 Here is a list of articles pertaining to Lakota mythology , a Native American people of North and South Dakota : #Anog Ite #Anpao #Canotila #Capa #Cetan #Heyoka #Iktomi #Inyan #Iya #Skan #Tate #Unhcegila #Untunktahe #Wakan Tanka #Waukheon #Whope #Wi #Yuwipi #Wakinyan #White Buffalo Calf Woman 
 Taney County is a county located in the southwestern portion of the U.S. state of Missouri . As of the 2010 census , the population was 51,675 . Its county seat is Forsyth . The county was officially organized on January 4 , 1837 , and named in honor of Roger Brooke Taney , the fifth Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court , most remembered for later delivering the majority opinion in ' ' Dred Scott v. Sandford . ' ' Taney County includes the popular tourist destination city of Branson . It is included in the Branson , MO Micropolitan Statistical Area , which is also included in the Springfield-Branson , MO Combined Statistical Area . With a wide range of live music shows , restaurants and shopping locations , Taney County is also the home of Table Rock , Taneycomo and Bull Shoals Lakes . # History # The first Taney County Courthouse was built by the early pioneers in 1837 and destroyed on July 22 , 1861 , during a Civil War Battle . The second Courthouse was destroyed by fire on December 19 to permit the building of Bull Shoals Lake . The fourth , and present , Courthouse was occupied on August 1 , 1952 . In 1989 , an addition was started and completed in 1991. # Geography # According to the 2000 U.S. Census , the county has a total area of , of which ( or 97.07% ) is land and ( or 2.93% ) is water . The county is drained by White River and its affluents. # Adjacent counties # *Christian County ( north ) *Douglas County ( northeast ) *Ozark County ( east ) *Marion County , Arkansas ( southeast ) *Boone County , Arkansas ( south ) *Carroll County , Arkansas ( southwest ) *Stone County ( west ) # Major highways # * * * * * # Minor Highways # * * * * * * # National protected area # *Mark Twain National Forest ( part ) # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 39,703 people , 16,158 households , and 11,052 families residing in the county . The population density was 24/km ( 63/mi ) . There ( 31/mi ) . The racial makeup of the county was 96.22% White , 0.35% Black or African American , 0.87% Native American , 0.34% Asian , 0.05% Pacific Islander , 0.74% from other races , and 1.42% from two or more races . Approximately 2.42% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . Among the major first ancestries reported in Taney County were 20.8% German , 18.9% American , 12.4% Irish , and 12.3% English , according to Census 2000 . There were 16,158 households out of which 27.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 56.60% were married couples living together , 8.60% had a female householder with no husband present , and 31.60% were non-families. 25.70% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.83 . In the county the population was spread out with 22.40% under the age of 18 , 10.20% from 18 to 24 , 26.20% from 25 to 44 , 65 years of age or older . The median age was 39 years . For every 100 females there were 94.00 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 90.40 males . The median income for a household in the county was $39,771 , and the median income for a family was $47,664 . Males had a median income of $25,431 versus $19,655 for females . The per capita income for the county was $21,663 . About 9.40% of families and 12.40% of the population were below the poverty line , including 17.60% of those under age 18 and 8.80% of those age 65 or over . # Cities and towns # *Bradleyville *Branson <sup> </sup> *Brownbranch *Bull Creek *Cedar Creek *Forsyth *Hilda *Hollister *Kirbyville *Kissee Mills *McClurg *Merriam Woods *Point Lookout *Powersite *Protem *Ridgedale *Rockaway Beach *Rueter *Saddlebrooke <sup> </sup> *Table Rock *Taneyville *Walnut Shade <sup> </sup> ' ' Denotes a municipality whose physical boundaries extend beyond Taney County ' ' # Education # Of adults 25 years of age and older in Taney County , 81.4% possess a high school diploma or higher while highest educational attainment . # Colleges and universities # Taney County is home to the College of the Ozarks. # Public Schools # *Bradleyville R-I School District - Bradleyville **Bradleyville Elementary School ( PK-06 ) **Bradleyville High School ( 07-12 ) * - Branson **Branson Primary School ( PK-01 ) **Branson Elementary East ( 02-04 ) **Branson Elementary West ( 02-04 ) **Branson Intermediate School ( 05-06 ) **Branson Jr . High School ( 07-08 ) **Branson High School ( 09-12 ) * - Forsyth **Forsyth Elementary School ( K-04 ) **Forsyth Middle School ( 05-08 ) **Forsyth High School ( 09-12 ) * - Hollister **Hollister Elementary School ( PK-04 ) **Hollister Middle School ( 05-06 ) **Hollister Jr . High School ( 07-08 ) **Hollister High School ( 09-12 ) * - Kirbyville **Kirbyville Elementary School ( K-03 ) **Kirbyville Middle School ( 04-08 ) * - Rueter **Mark Twain Elementary School ( K-08 ) *Taneyville R-II School District - Taneyville **Taneyville Elementary School ( K-08 ) # Private Schools # *Faith Christian Academy - Branson - ( PK-12 ) - Non-denominational Christian * - Hollister - ( PK-12 Forsyth - ( 05-08 ) - Baptist # Alternative &amp; Vocational Schools # *Delmina Woods Youth Facility - Forsyth - ( 06-12 ) - Alternative/Other School # Religion # According to the Association of Religion Data Archives County Membership Report ( 2000 ) , Taney County is a part of the Bible Belt with evangelical Protestantism being the majority religion . The most predominant denominations among residents in Taney County who adhere to a religion are Southern Baptists ( 32.88% ) , Roman Catholics ( 12.36% ) , and Presbyterians ( 9.13% ) . # Politics # # Local # The Republican Party completely controls politics at the local level in Taney County . Republicans hold every elected position in the county . # State # align= right border= 2 cellpadding= 4 cellspacing= 0 style= margin : 1em 1em 1em 0 ; border : 1px #aaa solid ; border-collapse : collapse ; font-size : 95% ; ! Year ! Republican ! Democratic ! Third Parties Taney County is divided into three legislative districts in the Missouri House of Representatives , all of which are held by Republicans . *District 62 Currently southwestern parts of the county and includes Branson , Hollister , and Table Rock . Election box candidate with party link *District 142 Currently represented by ( R-Nixa ) and consists of the northeastern parts of the county and includes Bull Creek and Taneyville . Election box candidate with party link *District 143 Currently represented by ( R-Cedar Creek ) and consists of the southeastern parts of the county and includes Forsyth , Merriam Woods , and Rockaway Beach . Election box candidate with party link All of Taney County is a part of Missouri 's 29th District in the Missouri Senate and is currently represented by State Senator ( R-Mt . Vernon ) . In 2008 , Goodman ran unopposed and was reelected with 100 percent of the vote . The 29th Senatorial District consists of Barry , Lawrence , McDonald , Ozark , Stone , and Taney counties . Election box candidate with party link # Federal # Currently , Taney County is split in its federal representation , with Jo Ann Emerson ( R-Cape Girardeau ) representing most of the central and eastern portions of the county in ) represents the western parts of the county ( including Branson ) in Missouri 's 7th Congressional District . Following redistricting , all of Taney County will now be included in the 7th Congressional District . Election box candidate with party link # #Political Culture# # align= right border= 2 cellpadding= 4 cellspacing= 0 style= margin : 1em 1em 1em 0 ; border : 1px #aaa solid ; border-collapse : collapse ; font-size : 95% ; ! Year ! Republican ! Democratic ! Third Parties Like most counties situated in Southwest Missouri , Taney County is a Republican stronghold in presidential elections . George W. Bush carried Taney County in 2000 and 2004 by more than two-to-one margins , and like many other rural counties throughout Missouri , Taney County strongly favored John McCain over Barack Obama in 2008 . No Democratic presidential nominee has won Taney County in over 50 years . Like most rural areas throughout the Bible Belt in Southwest Missouri , voters in Taney County traditionally adhere to socially and culturally conservative principles which tend to strongly influence their Republican leanings . In 2004 , Missourians voted between a man and a womanit overwhelmingly passed Taney County with 80.04 percent of the vote . The initiative passed the state with 71 percent of support from voters as Missouri became the first state to ban same-sex marriage . In 2006 , Missourians voted on a constitutional amendment to fund and legalize embryonic stem cell research in the stateit failed in Taney County with 56.64 percent voting against the measure . The initiative narrowly passed the state with 51 percent of support from voters as Missouri became one of the first states in the nation to approve embryonic stem cell research . Despite Taney Countys longstanding tradition of supporting socially conservative platforms , voters in the county have a penchant for advancing populist causes like increasing the minimum wage . In 2006 , Missourians voted on a proposition ( Proposition B ) to increase the minimum wage in the state to $6.50 an hourit passed Taney County with 77.78 percent of the vote . The proposition strongly passed every single county in Missouri with 78.99 percent voting in favor as the minimum wage was increased to $6.50 an hour in five other states also strongly approved increases in the minimum wage . # Missouri Presidential Preference Primary ( 2008 ) # In the 2008 Missouri Presidential Preference Primary , voters in Taney County from both political parties supported candidates who finished in second place in the state at large and nationally . *Former Governor Mike Huckabee ( R-Arkansas ) received more votes , a total of 3,850 , than any candidate from either party in Taney County during the 2008 Missouri Presidential Preference Primary . # Miscellaneous # In 2009 , Taney County officials voted to begin charging inmates $45 a day to stay at the jail . One critic referred to the charge as a poor person 's tax . The 2010 film Winter 's Bone was filmed entirely in Taney County and Christian County . Many locals were cast in significant roles in the film . The NAIA Men 's Basketball Championships are hosted every March at College of the Ozarks 
 Warren County is a county located in the U.S. state of Kentucky , specifically the Pennyroyal Plateau and Western Coal Fields regions . As of the 2010 census , the population was 113,792 . The county seat is Bowling Green . Generally the county is dry , prohibiting the sale of alcohol , but retail alcohol sales are allowed in the wet city of Bowling Green ; Warren County is classified as a moist county . Warren County is included in the Bowling Green , Kentucky , Metropolitan Statistical Area . # History # Warren County was the location of several Native American villages and burial mounds . The first white men to enter the area were the long hunters in the 1770s . General Elijah Covington was among the first landowners . McFadden 's Station , one of the earliest settlements , was established in 1785 by Andrew McFadden/McFadin on the northern bank of the Barren River at the Cumberland Trace . Warren County became the 23rd county of Kentucky in 1796 , from a section of Logan County . It was named after General Joseph Warren Paul Revere on their famous midnight ride to warn residents of the approaching British troops . He was also a hero of the Battle of Bunker Hill . Through the riverboat trade , Warren County thrived in the agricultural market . In 1859 , the Louisville and Nashville Railroad ( currently CSX Transportation ) was laid through the county . During the American Civil War The completion of Interstate 65 and Green River Parkway ( currently the William H. Natcher Parkway ) in the 1960s and 1970s , brought an industrial boom that transformed the farm-oriented county into a more urban one . In 1997 , Bowling Green became a Tree City USA , sponsored by the National Arbor Day Foundation . # Geography # According to the 2000 census , the county has a total area of , of which ( or 99.55% ) is land and ( or 0.45% ) is water . # Geographic features # The Green River forms the northern boundary of the county , and was a means of transportation for settlers . Tributaries of the Green River that flow through Warren County are the and Bay 's Fork . In the north the land is possibly the most rugged , since it lies between the Green and Barren rivers , with very tall ridges near Riverside and Richardsville . The major drainage in Warren county is Barren River , which flows through Bowling Green and is surrounded by steep ridges in some areas . Several sizable hills rise in Bowling Green proper . They were favored for forts and other development : a reservoir , hospital , and Civil War fort were built on one ; much of Western Kentucky University 's campus on another ; Hobson Grove , a historic Italian Renaissance style civil war era plantation estate on another ; and a second civil war fort on another . In the east the land is rolling ( much like central Kentucky 's landscape ) near Drakes Creek . The land in the south and southwest of the county is predominantly flat . In the western side of the county , the land is hilly with steep ridges and rocky and cliff-ridden near Gasper River . Shanty Hollow Lake is in the northwest corner west and the flatland in the south and southwest have soil that is fertile and supports tobacco , hay , corn and soybean crop production . The rest of the land is predominantly clay soil ; it is rocky and not very suitable for agriculture . Many residents rear livestock and horses , or hunt in these areas . # Major highways # * Interstate 65 * William H. Natcher Parkway * U.S. 231 * U.S. 31-W * U.S. 68/KY 80 * KY 185 * KY 234 * KY 880 # Adjacent counties # * Butler County - northwest * Edmonson County - northeast * Barren County - east * Allen County - southeast * Simpson County - south/southwest * Logan County - southwest # Demographics # At the 2000 census , there were 92,522 people , 35,365 households and 23,411 families residing in the county . The population density was 170 /sqmi . There were 38,350 housing units at an average density of 70 /sqmi . The racial makeup of the county was 86.98% White , 8.58% Black or African American , 0.24% Native American , 1.35% Asian , 0.08% from two or more races . 2.67% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . There were 35,365 households of which 31.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 51.40% were married couples living together , 11.20% had a female householder with no husband present , and 33.80% were non-families. 26.10% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.97 . The age distribution was 23.10% under the age of 18 , 16.20% from 18 to 24 , 29.10% from 25 to 44 , 21.10% from 45 to 64 , and 10.50% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 32 years . For every 100 females there were 96.20 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 93.00 males . The median household income was $36,151 , and the median family income was $45,142 . Males had a median income of $32,063 versus $22,777 for females . About 10.80% of families and 15.40% of the population were below the poverty line , including 17.80% of those under age 18 and 13.80% of those age 65 or over . # Cities and towns # * Bowling Green * Oakland * Plum Springs * Smiths Grove * Woodburn * Rockfield * Richpond * Plano * Alvaton # Educational institutions # # Elementary and secondary education # Two public school districts operate in the county : *Warren County Public Schools , which serves most of the county . *Bowling Green Independent Schools , which serves most of the city of Bowling Green . There are also private schools including *Anchored Christian School *Bowling Green Christian Academy *Foundation Christian Academy *St . Joseph School , a private Catholic school . *Carol Martin Gatton Academy of Mathematics and Science in Kentucky # #Warren County Public Schools# # # #Elementary Schools# # * Alvaton * Briarwood * Bristow * Cumberland Trace * Lost River * Jody Richards * North Warren * Oakland * Plano * Rich Pond * Richardsville * Rockfield * Warren * William H. Natcher # #Middle Schools# # * Drakes Warren Middle School # #High schools# # * Greenwood * Light House Academy * Warren Central * Warren East * South Warren High School # #Bowling Green Independent Schools# # # #Elementary schools# # * Dishman McGinnis * Parker Bennett Curry * Potter Gray * T. C. Cherry * W. R. McNeill # #Junior high schools# # * Bowling Green # #High schools# # * Eleventh Street * Bowling Green High School # Colleges and universities # * Southcentral Kentucky Community and Technical College * Western Kentucky University # Attractions # * Beech Bend Park - roller coasters , waterpark , raceway * Chevrolet Corvette and XLR Assembly Plant - daily tours * Eloise B. Houchens Center - Greek Revival-style mansion built in 1904 by a former Bowling Green mayor * Fort Webb Historic Park - preserved Civil War site * Historic Railpark at the L&amp;N Depot - two floor train museum with 6 restored railcars inside a 1925 depot . * Kentucky Museum and Library - exhibits of Kentucky artifacts , located on Western Kentucky University campus * Lost River Cave and Valley - location of the shortest and deepest James and company * National Corvette Museum - exhibits of the models of the Chevrolet Corvette since 1953 * Riverview at Hobson Grove - preserved mansion overlooking Barren River built from the late 1850s until 1872 
 In New Guinea mythology ( Orokolo ) , Papare is the lunar deity . 
 Green anarchism or eco-anarchism , is a school of thought within anarchism which puts a particular emphasis on environmental issues . An important early influence was the thought of the American anarchist Henry David Thoreau and his book ' ' Walden ' ' as well as Leo Tolstoy and lise Reclus . In the late 19th century there emerged anarcho-naturism as the fusion of anarchism and naturist philosophies within individualist anarchist circles in France , Spain , Cuba and Portugal . Important contemporary currents are anarcho-primitivism and social ecology . # Early ecoanarchism # # Henry David Thoreau # Anarchism started to have an ecological view mainly in the writings of American anarchist and transcendentalist Henry David Thoreau . In his book ' ' Walden ' ' he advocates simple living and self-sufficiency among natural surroundings in resistance to the advancement of industrial civilization . The work is part personal declaration of independence , social experiment , voyage of spiritual discovery , satire , and manual for self-reliance . First published in 1854 , it details Thoreau 's experiences over the course of two years , two months Walden Pond , amidst woodland owned by his friend and mentor Ralph Waldo Emerson , near Concord , Massachusetts . The book compresses the time into a single calendar year and uses passages of four seasons to symbolize human development . By immersing himself in nature , Thoreau hoped to gain a more objective understanding of society through personal introspection . Simple living and self-sufficiency were Thoreau 's other goals , and the whole project was inspired by transcendentalist philosophy , a central theme of the American Romantic Period . As Thoreau made clear in his book , his cabin was not in wilderness but at the edge of town , about two miles ( 3 km ) from his family home . A such Many have seen in Thoreau one of the precursors of ecologism and anarcho-primitivism represented today in John Zerzan . For George Woodcock this attitude can be also motivated by certain idea of resistance to progress and of rejection of the growing materialism which is the nature of American society in the mid XIX century . John Zerzan himself included the text Excursions ( 1863 ) by Against civilization : Readings and reflections ' ' from 1999. # lise Reclus # lise Reclus ( 15 March 1830 4 July 1905 ) , also known as Jacques lise Reclus , was a renowned French geographer , writer and anarchist . He produced his 19-volume masterwork ' ' La Nouvelle Gographie universelle , la terre et les hommes ' ' ( Universal Geography ) , over a period of nearly 20 years ( 18751894 ) . In 1892 he was awarded the prestigious Gold Medal of the Paris Geographical Society for this work , despite his having been banished from France because of his political activism . According to Kirkpatrick Sale : For the authors of An Anarchist FAQ Reclus argued that a secret harmony exists between the earth and the people whom it nourishes , and when imprudent societies let themselves violate this harmony , they always end up regretting it . Similarly , no contemporary ecologist would disagree with his comments that the truly civilised man and women understands that his or her nature is bound up with the interest of all and with that of nature . and works to improve his domain . Reclus advocated nature conservation and opposed meat-eating and cruelty to animals . He was a vegetarian . As a result , his ideas are seen by some historians as anticipating the modern social ecology and animal rights movements . Shortly before his death , Reclus completed ' ' L'Homme et la terre ' ' ( 1905 ) . In it , he added to his previous greater works by considering humanity 's development relative to its geographical environment . Reclus was also an early proponent of naturism. # Anarcho-naturism # In the late 19th century Anarchist naturism appeared as the union of anarchist and naturist philosophies . Mainly it had importance within individualist anarchist circles in Spain , France , Portugal , and Cuba . Anarcho-naturism advocated vegetarianism , free love , nudism and an ecological world view within anarchist groups and outside them . Anarcho-naturism promoted an ecological worldview , small ecovillages , and most prominently nudism as a way to avoid the artificiality of the industrial mass society of modernity . Naturist individualist anarchists saw the individual in his biological , physical Important promoters of this were Henri Zisly and Emile Gravelle who collaborated in ' ' La Nouvelle Humanit ' ' followed by ' ' Le Naturien ' ' , ' ' Le Sauvage ' ' , ' ' L'Ordre Naturel ' ' , &amp; ' ' La Vie Naturelle ' ' # # France # # Richard D. Sonn comments on the influence of naturist views in the wider French anarchist movement : Zisly 's political activity , primarily aimed at supporting a return to ' natural life ' through writing and practical involvement , stimulated lively confrontations within and outside the anarchist environment . Zisly vividly criticized progress and civilization , which he regarded as ' absurd , ignoble , and filthy . ' He openly opposed industrialization , arguing that machines were inherently authoritarian , defended nudism , advocated a non-dogmatic and non-religious adherence to the ' laws of nature , ' recommended a lifestyle based on limited needs and self-sufficiency , and disagreed with vegetarianism , which he considered ' anti-scientific. ' # # Cuba # # The historian Kirwin R. Schaffer in his study of Cuban anarchism anarchist movement alongside anarcho-communism and anarcho-syndicalism . Naturism was a global alternative health and lifestyle movement . Naturists focused on redefining one 's life to live simply , eat cheap but nutritious vegetarian diets , and raise one 's own food if possible . The countryside was posited as a romantic alternative to urban living , and some naturists even promoted what they saw as the healthful benefits of nudism . Globally , the naturist movement counted anarchists , liberals , and socialists as its followers . However , in Cuba a particular anarchist dimension evolved led by people like Adrin del Valle , who spearheaded the Cuban effort to shift naturism 's focus away from only individual health to naturism having a social emancipatory function . Schaffer reports the influence that anarcho-naturism had outside naturists circles . So For instance , nothing inherently prevented an anarcho-syndicalist in the Havana restaurant workers ' union from supporting the alternative health care programs of the anarcho-naturists and seeing those alternative practices as revolutionary . . Anarcho-naturists promoted a rural ideal , simple living , and being in harmony with Nature as ways to . Besides promoting an early twentieth-century back-to-the-land movement , they used these romantic images of Nature to illustrate how far removed a capitalist industrialized Cuba had departed from an anarchist view of natural harmony . The main propagandizer in Cuba of anarcho-naturism was the Catalonia born Adrin del Valle ( aka Palmiro de Lidia ) ... Over the following decades , Del Valle became a constant presence in not only the anarchist press that proliferated in Cuba but also mainstream literary publications ... From 1912 to 1913 he edited the freethinking journal ' ' El Audaz ' ' . Then he began his largest publishing job by helping to found and edit the monthly alternative health magazine that followed the anarcho-naturist line ' ' Pro-Vida ' ' . # # Spain # # Anarcho-naturism was quite important at the end of the 1920s in the spanish anarchist movement In France , later important propagandists of anarcho-naturism include Henri Zisly and mile Gravelle whose ideas were important in individualist anarchist circles in Spain , where Federico Urales ( pseudonym of Joan Montseny ) promoted the ideas of Gravelle and Zisly in ' The relation between Anarchism and Naturism gives way to the Naturist Federation , in July 1928 , and to the lV Spanish Naturist Congress , in September 1929 , both supported by the Libertarian Movement . However , in the short term , the Naturist and Libertarian movements grew apart in their conceptions of everyday life . The Naturist movement felt closer to the Libertarian individualism of some French theoreticians such as Henri Ner ( real name of Han Ryner ) than to the revolutionary goals proposed by some Anarchist organisations such as the FAI , ( Federacin Anarquista Ibrica ) . This ecological tendency in Spanish anarchism was strong enough as to call the attention of the CNTFAI in Spain . Daniel Gurin in ' ' Anarchism : From Theory to Practice ' ' reports : # # Isaac Puente # # Isaac Puente was an influential Spanish anarchist during the 1920s and 1930s and an important propagandist of anarcho-naturism , was a militant of both the CNT anarcho-syndicalist trade union and Iberian Anarchist Federation . He published the book ' ' El Comunismo Libertario y otras proclamas insurreccionales y and other insurrectionary and naturist proclaims ' ' ) in 1933 , which sold around 100,000 copies , and wrote the final document for the Extraordinary Confederal Congress of Zaragoza of 1936 which established the main political line for the CNT for that year . Puente was a doctor who approached his medical practice from a naturist point of view . He saw naturism as an integral solution for the working classes , alongside Neo-Malthusianism , and believed it concerned the living being while anarchism addressed the social being . He believed capitalist societies endangered the well-being of humans from both a socioeconomic and sanitary viewpoint , and promoted anarcho-communism alongside naturism as a solution . # # Other countries # # Naturism also met anarchism in the United Kingdom . In many of the alternative communities established in Britain in the early 1900s nudism , anarchism , vegetarianism and free love were accepted as part of a politically radical way of life . In the 1920s the inhabitants of the anarchist community at Whiteway , near Stroud in Gloucestershire , shocked the conservative residents of the area with their shameless the Italian Anarchist Federation in Carrara in 1965 , a group decided to split off from this organization and created the ' ' Gruppi di Iniziativa Anarchica ' ' . In the seventies , it was mostly composed of veteran individualist anarchists with an orientation of pacifism , naturism , etc , .. . American anarcho-syndicalist Sam Dolgoff shows some of the criticism that some people on the other anarchist currents at the time had for anarcho-naturist tendencies . Speaking of life at the Stelton Colony of New York in the 1930s , noted with disdain that it , like other colonies , was infested by vegetarians , naturists , nudists , and other cultists , who sidetracked true anarchist goals . One resident always went barefoot , ate raw food , mostly nuts and raisins , and refused to use a tractor , being opposed to machinery , and he did n't want to abuse horses , so he dug the earth himself . Such self-proclaimed anarchists were in reality ox-cart anarchists , Dolgoff said , who opposed organization and wanted to return to a simpler life . In an grumbled , I am sick and tired of these half-assed artists and poets who object to organization and want only to play with their belly buttons . . # Leo Tolstoy and tolstoyanism # Russian christian anarchist and anarcho-pacifist Leo Tolstoy is also recognized as an early influence in green anarchism . The novelist was struck by the description of Christian , Buddhist , and Hindu ascetic renunciation as being the path to holiness . After reading passages such as the following , which abound in Schopenhauer 's ethical chapters , the Russian nobleman chose poverty and formal denial of the will : # ' ' But this very necessity of involuntary suffering ( by poor people ) for eternal salvation is also expressed by that utterance of the Savior ( Matthew 19:24 ) : It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle , than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God . Therefore those who were greatly in earnest about their eternal salvation , chose voluntary poverty when fate had denied this to them and they had been born in but voluntarily took to the mendicant 's staff ; and Francis of Assisi , the founder of the mendicant orders who , as a youngster at a ball , where the daughters of all the notabilities were sitting together , was asked : Now Francis , will you not soon make your choice from these beauties ? and who replied : I have made a far more beautiful choice ! Whom ? ' ' La poverta ' ' ( poverty ) : whereupon he abandoned every thing shortly afterwards and wandered through the land as a mendicant . ' ' # Despite his misgivings about anarchist violence , Tolstoy took risks to circulate the prohibited publications of anarchist thinkers in Russia , and corrected the proofs of Kropotkin 's Words of a Rebel , illegally published in St Petersburg in 1906 . Tolstoy was enthused by the economic thinking of Henry George , incorporating it approvingly into later works such as ' ' Resurrection ' ' , the book that played a major factor in his excommunication . Tolstoyans identify themselves as Christians , but do not generally belong to an simple life , preferring to be vegetarian , non-smoking , teetotal and chaste . Tolstoyans are considered Christian pacifists and advocate nonresistance in all circumstances . They do not support or participate in the government which they consider immoral , violent and corrupt . Tolstoy rejected the state ( as it only exists on the basis of physical force ) and all institutions that are derived from it - the police , law courts and army . Tolstoy influenced Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi who set up a cooperative colony called Tolstoy Farm near Johannesburg , South Africa , having been inspired by Tolstoy 's ideas . The colony comprising 1,100 acre was funded by the Gandhian Herman Kallenbach and placed at the disposal of the satyagrahis from 1910 . He also inspired similar communal experiments in the United States where the residents were also influenced by the views of Henry George and Edward Bellamy. , as well as in Russia , England and the Netherlands . # Mid 20th century # Several anarchists from the mid-20th century , including Herbert Read , Ethel Mannin , Leopold Kohr , and Paul Goodman , 's 1944 book ' ' Bread and Roses : A Utopian Survey and Blue-Print ' ' has been described by anarchist historian Robert Graham as setting forth an ecological vision in opposition to the prevailing and destructive industrial organization of society . # Leopold Kohr # Leopold Kohr ( 5 October 1909 in Oberndorf bei Salzburg , Austria 26 February 1994 in Gloucester , England ) was an economist , philosopher and political scientist known both for his opposition to the cult of bigness in social organization and as one of those who initiated the ' ' small is beautiful ' ' movement . For almost twenty years he was Professor of Economics and Public Administration at the University of Puerto Rico . He described himself as a philosophical anarchist . In 1937 , Kohr became a freelance correspondent during the Spanish Civil War , where he was impressed by the limited , self-contained governments of the separatist states of Catalonia and Aragon , as well as the small Spanish anarchist city states of Alcoy and Caspe . In his first published essay Disunion Now : A Plea for a Society 1941 , Kohr wrote about a Europe at war : We have ridiculed the many little states , now we are terrorized by their few successors . He called for the breakup of Europe into hundreds of city states . Kohr developed his ideas in a series of books , including ' ' The Breakdown of Nations ' ' ( 1957 ) , ' ' Development without Aid ' ' ( 1973 ) and ' ' The Overdeveloped Nations ' ' ( 1977 ) . From Leopold Kohr 's most popular work ' ' The Breakdown of Nations ' ' : # ... there seems to be only one cause behind all forms of social misery : bigness . Oversimplified as this may seem , we shall find the idea more easily acceptable if we consider that bigness , or oversize , is really much more than just a social problem . It appears to be the one and only problem permeating all creation . Whenever something is wrong , something is too big . ... And if the body of a people becomes diseased with the fever of aggression , not because it has fallen victim to bad leadership or mental derangement . It is because human beings , so charming as individuals or in small aggregations , have been welded into overconcentrated social units . # Later in his academic and writing career he protested the cult of bigness and economic growth and promoted the concept of human scale and small community life . He argued that massive external aid to poorer nations stifled local initiatives and participation . His vision called for a dissolution of centralized political and economic structures in favor of local control . Kohr was an important inspiration to the Green , bioregional , Fourth World , decentralist , and anarchist movements , Kohr contributed often to John Papworth 's Journal for the Fourth World ' , Resurgence . One of Kohr 's students was economist E. F. Schumacher , another prominent influence on these movements , whose best selling book ' ' Small Is Beautiful ' ' took its title from one of Kohr 's core principles . Similarly , his ideas inspired Kirkpatrick Sale 's books ' ' Human Scale ' ' ( 1980 Bioregional Vision ' ' ( 1985 ) . Sale arranged the first American publication of ' ' The Breakdown of Nations ' ' in 1978 and wrote the foreword . # Murray Bookchin # Murray Bookchin ( January 14 , 1921 July 30 , 2006 ) was an American libertarian socialist author , orator , and philosopher . In 1958 , Murray Bookchin defined himself as an anarchist , seeing parallels between anarchism and ecology . His first book , ' ' Our Synthetic Environment , ' ' was published under the pseudonym Lewis Herber in 1962 , a few months before Rachel Carson 's ' ' Silent Spring ' ' . The book described a broad range of environmental ills but received little attention because of its political radicalism . His groundbreaking essay Ecology and Revolutionary Thought introduced ecology as a concept in radical politics . In 1968 he founded another group that published the influential ' ' Anarchos ' ' magazine , which published that and other innovative essays on post-scarcity and on ecological technologies such as solar and wind energy , and on decentralization and miniaturization . Lecturing of ecology to the counterculture . ' ' Post-Scarcity Anarchism ' ' is a collection of essays written by Murray Bookchin and first published in 1971 by Ramparts Press . It outlines the possible form anarchism might take under conditions of post-scarcity . It is one of Bookchin 's major works , and its radical thesis provoked controversy for being utopian and messianic in its faith in the liberatory potential of technology . Bookchin argues that post-industrial societies are also post-scarcity societies , and can thus imagine the fulfillment of the social and cultural potentialities latent in a technology of abundance . The self-administration of society is now made possible by technological advancement and , when technology is used in an ecologically sensitive manner , the revolutionary potential of society will be much changed . In 1982 , his book ' ' The Ecology of Freedom ' ' had a profound impact on the emerging ecology movement , both in the United States and abroad . He was a principal figure in the Burlington Greens in 1986-90 , an ecology group that ran candidates for city council on a program to Cities ' ' ( originally published in 1987 as ' ' The Rise of Urbanization and the Decline of Citizenship ' ' ) , Bookchin traced the democratic traditions that influenced his political philosophy and defined the implementation of the libertarian municipalism concept . A few years later ' ' The Politics of Social Ecology ' ' , written by his partner of 20 years , Janet Biehl , briefly summarized these ideas . # Jacques Ellul # Jacques Ellul ( January 6 , 1912 May 19 , 1994 ) was a French philosopher , law professor , sociologist , lay theologian , and Christian anarchist . He wrote several books about Christianity , the technological society , propaganda , and the interaction between religion and politics . Professor of History and the Sociology of Institutions on the Faculty of Law and Economic Sciences at the University of Bordeaux , he authored 58 books and more than a thousand articles over his lifetime in all , the dominant theme of which has been the threat to human freedom and religion created by modern technique . The Ellulian concept of technique is ' The Technological Society ' ' ( 1964 ) . What many consider to be Ellul 's most important work , ' ' The Technological Society ' ' ( 1964 ) was originally titled : ' ' La Technique : L'enjeu du sicle ' ' ( literally , The Stake of the Century ) . In it , Ellul set forth seven characteristics of modern technology that make efficiency a necessity : rationality , artificiality , automatism of technical choice , self-augmentation , monism , universalism , and autonomy . For Ellul the rationality of technique enforces logical and mechanical organization through division of labor , the setting of production standards , etc . And it creates an artificial system which eliminates or subordinates the natural world . Today , he argues , the technological society is generally held sacred ( cf. Saint Steve Jobs ) . Since he defines technique as the totality of methods rationally arrived at , and having absolute efficiency ( for a given stage of development ) in every field of human activity , it is clear that his sociological analysis focuses not on the society efficient techniques . # Contemporary developments # Notable contemporary writers espousing green anarchism include Derrick Jensen , Jaime Semprun , George Draffan , John Zerzan , Starhawk and Alan Carter . # Social ecology and communalism # Social ecology is closely related to the work and ideas of Murray Bookchin and influenced by anarchist Peter Kropotkin . Social ecologists assert that the present ecological crisis has its roots in human social problems , and that the domination of human-over-nature stems from the domination of human-over-human . Bookchin later developed a political philosophy to complement social ecology which he called Communalism ( spelled with a capital C to differentiate it from other forms of communalism ) . While originally conceived as a form of Social anarchism , he later developed Communalism into a separate ideology which incorporates what he saw as the most beneficial elements of Anarchism , Marxism , syndicalism , and radical ecology . Politically , Communalists advocate a network of directly democratic citizens ' assemblies in individual communities/cities organized in a confederal fashion . This method used to achieve this is called Libertarian Municipalism which involves the establishment of with the goal of eventually replacing the nation-state . Janet Biehl ( born 1953 ) is a writer associated with social ecology , the body of ideas developed and publicized by Murray Bookchin . In 1986 , she attended the Institute for Social Ecology and there , began a collaborative relationship with Bookchin , working intensively with him over the next two decades in the explication of social ecology from their shared home in Burlington , Vermont . From 1987 to 2000 , she and Bookchin co-wrote and co-published the theoretical newsletter ' ' Green Perspectives ' ' , later renamed ' ' Left Green Perspectives ' ' . She is the editor and compiler of ' ' The Murray Bookchin Reader ' ' ( 1997 ) ; the author of ' ' The Politics of Social Ecology : Libertarian Municipalism ' ' ( 1998 ) and ' ' Rethinking Ecofeminist Politics ' ' ( 1991 ) ; and coauthor ( with Peter Staudenmaier ) of ' ' Ecofascism : Lessons from the German Experience ' ' ( 1995 ) . # ' ' Green Anarchist ' ' # The magazine the principal voice in the UK advocating green anarchism , an explicit fusion of libertarian socialist and ecological thinking . Founded after the 1984 Stop the City protests , the magazine was launched in the summer of that year by an editorial collective consisting of Alan Albon , Richard Hunt and Marcus Christo . Early issues featured a range of broadly anarchist and ecological ideas , bringing together groups and individuals as varied as Class War , veteran anarchist writer Colin Ward , anarcho-punk band Crass , as well as the Peace Convoy , anti-nuclear campaigners , animal rights activists and so on . However the diversity that many saw as the publication 's greatest strength quickly led to irreconcilable arguments between the essentially pacifist approach of Albon and Christo , and the advocacy of violent confrontation with the State favoured by Hunt . During the 1990s ' ' Green Anarchist ' ' came under the helm of an editorial collective that included Paul Rogers , Steve Booth and others , during which period the publication became increasingly aligned with primitivism , an anti-civilization philosophy advocated by writers such as John 1995 , Hampshire Police began a series of at least 56 raids , code named ' Operation Washington ' , that eventually resulted in the August to November 1997 Portsmouth trial of Green Anarchist editors Booth , Saxon Wood , Noel Molland and Paul Rogers , as well as Animal Liberation Front ( ALF ) Press Officer Robin Webb and Animal Liberation Front Supporters Group ( ALFSG ) newsletter editor Simon Russell . The defendants organised the GANDALF Defence campaign . Three of the editors of Green Anarchist , Noel Molland , Saxon Wood and Booth were jailed for ' conspiracy to incite ' . However , all three were shortly afterwards released on appeal . # Fredy Perlman # Fredy Perlman ( August 20 , 1934 July 26 , 1985 ) was a Czech-born , naturalised American author , publisher and militant . His most popular work , the book ' ' Against His-Story , Against Leviathan ! ' ' , details the rise of state domination with a retelling of history through the Hobbesian metaphor of the Leviathan . The book remains a major source of inspiration for anti-civilization of philosopher John Zerzan. # Anarcho-primitivism # Anarcho-primitivism is an anarchist critique of the origins and progress of civilization . According to anarcho-primitivism , the shift from hunter-gatherer to agricultural subsistence gave rise to social stratification , coercion , and alienation . Anarcho-primitivists advocate a return to non- civilized ways of life through deindustrialisation , abolition of the division of labour or specialization , and abandonment of large-scale organization technologies . There are other non-anarchist forms of primitivism , and not all primitivists point to the same phenomenon as the source of modern , civilized problems . Anarcho-primitivists are often distinguished by their focus on the praxis of achieving a feral state of being through rewilding . # # John Zerzan # # John Zerzan is an American anarchist and primitivist philosopher and author . His works criticize agricultural civilization as inherently oppressive , and advocate drawing upon the ways of life of hunter gatherers as an inspiration for what a free society should look like . Some subjects of his criticism include domestication , language , symbolic thought ( such as mathematics and art ) and the concept of time Refusal ' ' ( 1988 ) , ' ' Future Primitive and Other Essays ' ' ( 1994 ) , ' ' Running on Emptiness ' ' ( 2002 ) , ' ' Against Civilization : Readings and Reflections ' ' ( 2005 ) and ' ' Twilight of the Machines ' ' ( 2008 ) . Zerzan was one of the editors of ' ' Green Anarchy ' ' , a controversial journal of anarcho-primitivist and insurrectionary anarchist thought . He is also the host of ' ' Anarchy Radio ' ' in Eugene on the University of Oregon 's radio station KWVA . He has also served as a contributing editor at ' ' Anarchy Magazine ' ' and has been published in magazines such as ' ' AdBusters ' ' . He does extensive speaking tours around the world , and is married to an independent consultant to museums and other nonprofit organizations . In 1974 , Black and Red Press published ' ' Unions Against Revolution ' ' by Spanish ultra-left theorist Grandizo Munis that included an essay by Zerzan which previously appeared in the journal ' , Zerzan became intimately involved with the ' ' Fifth Estate ' ' , ' ' Anarchy : A Journal of Desire Armed ' ' , ' ' Demolition Derby ' ' and other anarchist periodicals . He began to question civilization in the early 80 's , after having sought to confront issues around the neutrality of technology and division of labour , at the time when Fredy Perlman was making similar conclusions . # # ' ' Green Anarchy ' ' # # ' ' Green Anarchy ' ' was a magazine published by a collective located in Eugene , Oregon . The magazine 's focus was primitivism , post-left anarchy , radical environmentalism , African American struggles , anarchist resistance , indigenous resistance , earth and animal liberation , anti-capitalism and supporting political prisoners . It had a circulation of 8,000 , partly in prisons , the prison subscribers given free copies of each issue as stated in the magazine . Green Anarchy was started in 2000 and in 2009 the Green Anarchy website shut down , leaving a final , brief message about the cessation of the An Anti-Civilization Journal of Theory and Action . Author John Zerzan was one of the publication 's editors . # # ' ' Species Traitor ' ' # # ' ' Species Traitor ' ' is a sporadically published journal of insurrectionary anarcho-primitivism . It is printed as a project of Black and Green Network and edited by anarcho-primitivist writer , Kevin Tucker . ST was initially labeled as a project of the Coalition Against Civilization ( CAC ) and the Black and Green Network ( BAG ) . The CAC was started towards the end of 1999 in the aftermath of the massive street protests in Eugene ( Reclaim the Streets ) and in Seattle ( WTO ) of that year . That aftermath gave a new voice and standing for green anarchist and anarcho-primitivist writers and viewpoints within both the anarchist milieu and the culture at large . The first issue came out in winter of 2000-2001 ( currently out of print ) and contained a mix of reprints and some original articles from Derrick Jensen and John Zerzan among others . Issue two came in the following year step from the first issue in becoming something of its own rather than another mouthpiece of green anarchist rhetoric . The articles took a more in depth direction opening a more analytical and critical draw between anarchy and anthropology , attacks on Reason and the Progress/linear views of human history and Future that stand at the base of the ideology of civilization . # Vegan anarchism # Veganarchism or vegan anarchism , is the political philosophy of veganism ( more specifically animal liberation and earth liberation ) and anarchism , creating a combined praxis that is designed to be a means for social revolution . This encompasses viewing the state as unnecessary and harmful to animals , both human and non-human , whilst practising a vegan lifestyle . It is either perceived as a combined theory , or that both philosophies are essentially the same . It is further described as an anti-speciesist perspective on green anarchism , or an anarchist perspective on animal liberation . Veganarchists typically view oppressive dynamics within society to be interconnected , from statism , racism and sexism to human supremacy and redefine veganism as a . Those who believe in veganarchy can be either against reform for animals or for it , although do not limit goals to changes within the law . # Derrick Jensen # Derrick Jensen is an American author and environmental activist ( and critic of mainstream environmentalism ) living in Crescent City , California . Jensen 's work is sometimes characterized as anarcho-primitivist , although he has categorically rejected that label , describing primitivist as a racist way to describe indigenous peoples . He prefers to be called indigenist or an ally to the indigenous , because indigenous peoples have had the only sustainable human social organizations , and .. we need to recognize that we colonizers are all living on stolen land . ' ' A Language Older Than Words ' ' uses the lens of domestic violence to look at the larger violence of western culture . ' ' The Culture of Make Believe ' ' begins by exploring racism and misogyny and moves to examine how this cultures economic system leads inevitably to hatred and atrocity . ' ' Strangely Like War ' ' is about deforestation . ( It begins : As is true for most people I know , Ive always loved learning . As is also true for most people I know , I always hated school . Why is that ? ) . ' ' Welcome to the Machine ' ' is about surveillance , and more broadly about science and what he perceives to be a Western obsession with control . ' ' Resistance Against Empire ' ' consists of interviews with J. W. Smith ( on poverty ) , Kevin Bales ( on slavery ) , Anuradha Mittal ( on hunger ) , Juliet Schor ( ' globalization ' and environmental degradation ) , Ramsey Clark ( on US ' defense ' ) , Stephen Schwartz ( editor of ' ' The Nonproliferation Review ' ' , on nukes ) , Alfred McCoy ( politics and heroin ) , Christian Parenti ( the US prison system ) , Katherine Albrecht ( on RFID ) , and Robert McChesney ( on ( freedom of ) the media ) conducted between 1999 and 2004 . ' ' Endgame ' ' is about what he describes he asks : Do you believe that this culture will undergo a voluntary transformation to a sane and sustainable way of living ? Nearly everyone he talks to says no . His next question is : How would this understanding that this culture will not voluntarily stop destroying the natural world , eliminating indigenous cultures , exploiting the poor , and killing those who resist shift our strategy and tactics ? The answer ? Nobody knows , because we never talk about it : were too busy pretending the culture will undergo a magical transformation . ' ' Endgame ' ' , he says , is about that shift in strategy , and in tactics . Jensen co-wrote the book ' ' Deep Green Resistance : Strategy to Save the Planet ' ' with Lierre Keith and Aric McBay # CrimethInc. # CrimethInc. is a decentralized anarchist collective of autonomous cells . CrimethInc. emerged in the mid-1990s , initially as the hardcore zine ' ' Inside Front ' ' , and began operating as a collective in 1996 . It has since published widely read articles and zines for the anarchist . Individuals adopting the CrimethInc. ' ' nom de guerre ' ' have included convicted ELF arsonists , as well as hacktivists who successfully attacked the websites of DARE , Republican National Committee and sites related to U.S. President George W. Bush 's 2004 re-election campaign . The creation of propaganda has been described as the collectives ' core function . Among their best-known publications are the books ' ' Days of War , Nights of Love ' ' , ' ' Expect Resistance ' ' , ' ' Evasion ' ' , ' ' Recipes for Disaster : An Anarchist Cookbook ' ' and the pamphlet ' ' Fighting For Our Lives ' ' ( of which , to date , they claim to have printed 600,000 copies ) , the hardcore punk/political zine ' ' Inside Front ' ' , and the music of hardcore punk bands . As well as the traditional anarchist opposition to the state and capitalism , agents have , at times , advocated a straight edge lifestyle , the total supersession of gender roles , violent insurrection against the state , and the refusal engage in direct action , ( not to be confused with ecoterrorism ) . Organizing themselves through groups like Earth First ! , Root Force , or more drastically , the Earth Liberation Front ( ELF ) , Earth Liberation Army ( ELA ) and Animal Liberation Front ( ALF ) . They may take direct action against what they see as systems of oppression , such as the logging industry , the meat and dairy industries , animal testing laboratories , genetic engineering facilities and , more rarely , government institutions . Such actions are usually , though not always , non-violent , with groups such as The Olga Cell attempting assassinations of nuclear scientists , and other related groups sending letterbombs to nano tech and nuclear tech-related targets . Though not necessarily Green anarchists , activists have used the names Animal Rights Militia , Justice Department and Revolutionary Cells among others , to claim responsibility for openly violent attacks . # #Convictions# # Rod Coronado is an eco-anarchist and is an unofficial spokesperson for the Animal Liberation Front and Earth Liberation Front . On February 28 , 1992 , Michigan State University ( MSU ) , and released mink from a nearby research farm on campus , an action claimed by the ALF , and for which Coronado was subsequently convicted . In 1997 , the editors of ' ' Green Anarchist ' ' magazine and two British supporters of the Animal Liberation Front were tried in connection with conspiracy to incite violence , in what came to be known as the GANDALF trial . Green anarchist Tre Arrow was sought by the FBI in connection with an ELF arson on April 15 , 2001 at Ross Island Sand and Gravel in Portland , torching three trucks amounting of $200,000 in damage . Another arson occurred a month later at Ray Schoppert Logging Company in Estacada , Oregon , on June 1 , 2001 against logging trucks and a front loader , resulting in $50,000 damage . Arrow was indicted by a federal grand jury in Oregon and charged with four felonies for this crime on October 18 , 2002 . On March 13 , 2004 , after fleeing to British Columbia , he was arrested in Victoria for stealing illegally . He was then sentenced on August 12 , 2008 to 78 months in federal prison for his part in the arson and conspiracy ELF attacks in 2001 . In January 2006 , Eric McDavid , a green anarchist , was convicted of conspiring to use fire or explosives to damage corporate and government property . On March 8 , he formally declared a hunger strike due to the jail refusing to provide him with vegan food . He has been given vegan food off and on since . In September 2007 , he was convicted on all counts after the two activists he conspired with pled guilty testified against him . An FBI confidential source named Anna was revealed as a fourth participant , in what McDavid 's defense argued was entrapment . In May 2008 , he was sentenced to nearly 20 years in prison . On March 3 , 2006 , a federal jury in Trenton , New Jersey convicted six members of SHAC , including green-anarchist Joshua Harper , for terrorism and Internet stalking , according to the ' ' New York Times ' ' , on those who did business with Huntingdon Life Sciences HLS . In September 2006 , the SHAC 7 received jail sentences of 3 to 6 years . ; Other prisoners * Marco Camenisch ; Italian green anarchist accused of arson against electricity pylon. * Nicole Vosper ; green anarchist who pleaded guilty to charges against HLS. * Marie Jeanette Mason #04672-061 , FMC Carswell , Federal Medical Center , P.O. Box 27137 , Fort Worth , TX 76127 , USA . Serving 21 years and 10 months for her involvement in an ELF arson against a University building carrying out Genetically Modified crop tests . Marie also pleaded guilty to conspiring to carry out ELF actions and admitted involvement in 12 other ELF actions . ( vegan ) . 
 Arundhati may refer to : * Arundhati ( Hinduism ) , the Hindu goddess of the sky , stars and night time * Arundhati ( given name ) * ' ' Arundhati ' ' ( epic ) , a 1994 Hindi epic poem * ' ' Arundhati ' ' ( 1967 film ) , a 1967 Oriya film directed by Prafulla Sengupta * ' ' Arundhati ' ' ( 2009 film ) , a 2009 Telugu film directed by Kodi Ramakrishna * ' ' Arundhati ' ' ( 2014 film ) , an upcoming film * Arundhati ( actress ) , who has appeared in Tamil films in the 2010s * Arundhati Roy , author of The God of Small Things and , etc ... 
 established = 1944 Whitsunday Islands is a national park in Queensland , Australia , northwest of Brisbane . # Geography # The Whitsunday Islands lie midway along Australia 's Queensland coast and are bordered by the Great Barrier Reef and the waters of the Coral Sea . Migrating humpback whales favour the waters around the Whitsunday Islands as a calving ground between May and September each year . Marine stingers are found in the waters of the islands between October and May . The region spans from the beaches of Bowen in the north and Laguna Whitsundays in the south . All 74 of the islands are surrounded by the Great Barrier Reef and only eight of them are inhabited . 
 Chignik Lagoon ( Alutiiq : ' ' Nanwarnaq ' ' ) is a census-designated place ( CDP ) in Lake and Peninsula Borough , Alaska , United States . At the 2010 census the population was 78. # Geography # Chignik Lagoon is located at ( 56.307535 , -158.535023 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 13.1 sqmi , all of it land . In 2009 the Marines of 4th Combat Engineer Battalion , 4th Marine Division , began work on an inter-village road system linking Chignik Lake to Chignik Lagoon . This is the first phase of potentially creating road links between Chignik Lake , Chignik Lake and Chignik. # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 103 people , 33 households , and 22 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 7.9 people per square mile ( 3.0/km ) . There were 68 housing units at an average density of 5.2/sq mi ( 2.0/km ) . The racial makeup of the CDP was 11.65% White , 0.97% Black or two or more races . There were 33 households out of which 48.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 60.6% were married couples living together , and 33.3% were non-families. 24.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 3.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 3.12 and the average family size was 3.95 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 31.1% under the age of 18 , 16.5% from 18 to 24 , 27.2% from 25 to 44 , 18.4% from 45 to 64 , and 6.8% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 26 years . For every 100 females there were 134.1 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 184.0 males . The median income for a household in the CDP was $92,297 , and the median income for a family was $99,054 . Males had a median income of $33,750 versus $38,750 for females . The per capita income for the CDP was $28,941 living below the poverty line , including no under eighteens and none of those over 64. 
 subdivisiontype1 = State subdivisiontype2 = County Pearsonville is a census-designated place ( CDP ) in Inyo County , California , United States . The population was 17 at the 2010 census , down from 27 at the 2000 census . Pearsonville has been dubbed the Hubcap Capital of the World because of resident Lucy Pearson 's collection of hubcaps , which are rumored to number over 80,000. # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 4.2 sqmi , over 98% of which is land and 1.93% is water . # Demographics # # 2010 # The 2010 United States Census reported that Pearsonville had a population of 17 . The population density was 4.0 people per square mile ( 1.6/km ) . The racial makeup of Pearsonville was 16 ( 94.1% ) White , 0 ( 0.0% ) African American , 0 ( 0.0% ) Native American , 0 ( 0.0% ) Asian , 0 ( 0.0% ) Pacific Islander , 1 ( 5.9% ) from other races , and 0 ( 0.0% ) from two or more persons ( 5.9% ) . The Census reported that 17 people ( 100% of the population ) lived in households , 0 ( 0% ) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters , and 0 ( 0% ) were institutionalized . There were 9 households , out of which 0 ( 0% ) had children under the age of 18 living in them , 3 ( 33.3% ) were opposite-sex married couples living together , 1 ( 11.1% ) had a female householder with no husband present , 1 ( 11.1% ) had a male householder with no wife present . There were 0 ( 0% ) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships , and 0 ( 0% ) same-sex married couples or partnerships . 4 households ( 44.4% ) were made up of individuals and 2 ( 22.2% ) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 1.89 . There were 5 families ( 55.6% of all households ) ; the average family size was 2.40 . The population was spread out with 0 people ( 0% ) under the age of 18 , 2 people ( 5.9% ) aged 25 to 44 , 8 people ( 47.1% ) aged 45 to 64 , and 6 people ( 35.3% ) who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 59.8 years . For every 100 females there were 70.0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 70.0 males . There were 16 housing units at an average density of 3.8 per square mile ( 1.5/km ) , of which 7 ( 77.8% ) were owner-occupied , and 2 ( 22.2% ) were occupied by renters . The homeowner vacancy rate was 12.5% ; the rental vacancy rate was 0% . 15 people ( 88.2% of the population ) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 2 people ( 11.8% ) lived in rental housing units . # 2000 # As of the census of 2000 , there were 27 people , 12 households , and 8 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 6.4 people per square mile ( 2.5/km ) . There were 22 housing units at an average density of 5.2 per the CDP was 88.89% White , 7.41% from other races , and 3.70% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 14.81% of the population . There were 12 households out of which 25.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 58.3% were married couples living together , 8.3% had a female householder with no husband present , and 33.3% were non-families. 33.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 25.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.88 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 25.9% under the age of 18 , 22.2% from 25 to 44 , 40.7% from 45 to 64 , and 11.1% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 46 years . For every 100 females there were 125.0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 81.8 males . # Politics # In the state legislature , Pearsonville is in , and 
 subdivisiontype1 = State subdivisiontype2 = County Tabernash is a census-designated place ( CDP ) in Grand County , Colorado , United States . The population was 165 at the 2000 census . The Tabernash Post Office has the ZIP Code 80478. # Geography # Tabernash is located at ( 39.992614 , -105.846522 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 4.1 sqmi , all of it land . # Climate # This climate type is dominated by the winter season , a long , bitterly cold period with short , clear days , relatively little precipitation mostly in the form of snow , and low humidity . According to the Kppen Climate Classification system , Tabernash has a subarctic climate , abbreviated Dfc on climate maps . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 165 people , 72 households , and 38 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 40.8 people per square mile ( 15.7/km ) . There were 103 housing units at an average density of 25.5 per square CDP was 96.36% White , 1.21% African American , 0.61% Native American , 0.61% Asian , 0.61% from other races , and 0.61% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.82% of the population . There were 72 households out of which 25.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 47.2% were married couples living together , 4.2% had a female householder with no husband present , and 47.2% were non-families. 26.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 2.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.29 and the average family size was 3.03 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 24.2% under the age of 18 , 4.2% from 18 to 24 , 47.3% from 25 to 44 , 18.2% from 45 to 64 , and 6.1% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 34 years . For every 100 females there were 123.0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were the CDP was $40,179 , and the median income for a family was $12,411 . Males had a median income of $36,250 versus $24,750 for females . The per capita income for the CDP was $20,485 . About 51.1% of families and 27.4% of the population were below the poverty line , including 27.6% of those under the age of eighteen and 100.0% of those sixty five or over . # 1984 airplane crash # On August 10 , 1984 , a Cessna L-19 Bird Dog ( registration number N4584A ) crashed in a forest near Tabernash . The wreck was found by a pair of backpackers more than three years later on August 23 , 1987 . A 6 minute video shot from a VHS camcorder mounted on the instrument panel was found at the site . The heavily damaged tape , some of it hanging from tree branches , was recovered and repaired by Colorado deputy sheriff Dale Wood . Subsequent analysis of the footage revealed that the pilot had not taken into account the density altitude conditions that existed on the day of the flight . The aircraft to the fact that it was essentially at or above its service ceiling , and in an attempt to remedy the situation , the pilot stalled the airplane three times during a steep bank to the right . The pilot could be heard yelling , Damn , hang on Ronnie ! to his one backseat passenger moments before impacting the terrain . The family of the deceased had put a 20-year moratorium ( via the FAA ) on the release of the film to the general public with the only stipulation that it ( at the FAA 's request to the family of the deceased ) be shown only to flight instructors at conventions and workshops . The moratorium eventually expired and was not renewed , and thus the footage effectively became public domain . 
 subdivisiontype1 = State subdivisiontype2 = County subdivisiontype3 = Ocean City is a census-designated place ( CDP ) in Okaloosa County , Florida , United States . The population was 5,594 at the 2000 census . It is part of the Fort Walton Beach&amp;ndash ; Crestview&amp;ndash ; Destin Metropolitan Statistical Area . # Geography # Ocean City is located at ( 30.439798 , -86.607079 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 1.9 sqmi , of which , 1.6 sqmi of it is land and 0.3 sqmi of it ( 16.23% ) is water . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 5,594 people , 2,478 households , and 1,479 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 3,493.5 people per square mile ( 1,349.9/km ) . There were 2,693 housing units at an average density of 1,681.8/sq mi ( 649.9/km ) . The racial makeup of the CDP was 83.98% White , 7.01% African American , 0.64% Native American , 3.24% Asian , 0.05% Pacific Islander , 1.59% from other races , Latino of any race were 4.31% of the population . There were 2,478 households out of which 23.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 44.8% were married couples living together , 11.3% had a female householder with no husband present , and 40.3% were non-families. 31.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.83 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 20.9% under the age of 18 , 9.8% from 18 to 24 , 30.7% from 25 to 44 , 23.3% from 45 to 64 , and 15.3% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 38 years . For every 100 females there were 98.0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 98.3 males . The median income for a household in the CDP was $35,759 , and the median income for a family was $43,625 . Males had a median income of for the CDP was $23,418 . About 5.9% of families and 8.6% of the population were below the poverty line , including 15.4% of those under age 18 and 6.2% of those age 65 or over . 
 subdivisiontype1 = State subdivisiontype2 = County Kahuku is a census-designated place ( CDP ) in the Ko olauloa District on the island of Oahu , County of Honolulu , Hawaii , United States . In the Hawaiian language , ' ' ka huku ' ' means the projection , presumably a reference to Kahuku Point nearby , the northernmost point of land on the island of Oahu . As of the 2010 Census , Kahuku had a population of 2,614. # Geography # Kahuku is located at . This community is located northwest from Laie and east from Kuilima and Kawela Bay along Kamehameha Highway ( Route 83 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 2.3 sqmi , of which 1.0 sqmi is land and 1.3 sqmi is water . The total area is 57.46% water , the Pacific Ocean lying off the coast in the census tract. # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 2,097 people , 509 households , and 401 families residing in the CDP . The population density was were 518 housing units at an average density of 531.3 per square mile ( 206.2/km ) . The racial makeup of the CDP was 11.06% White , 0.29% Black or African American , 0.14% Native American , 26.85% Asian , 27.28% Pacific Islander , 1.05% from other races , and 33.33% from two or more races . 8.63% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . There were 509 households out of which 43.2% have children under the age of 18 living with them , 59.3% are married couples living together , 14.3% had a female householder with no husband present , and 21.2% were non-families. 19.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 3.96 and the average family size was 4.63 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 35.4% under the age of 18 , 10.7% from 18 to 24 , 23.3% from 25 to 44 , 17.8% from 45 to 64 , and 12.7% who were 65 years of age or older 100 females there were 101.2 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 96.9 males . The median income for a household in the CDP was $39,135 , and the median income for a family was $47,045 . Males had a median income of $29,934 versus $22,366 for females . The per capita income for the CDP was $12,340. 14.6% of the population and 11.8% of families were below the poverty line . Out of the total population , 17.4% of those under the age of 18 and 17.7% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line . # Areas of interest # The ZIP Code for Kahuku is 96731 . In the mid-1970s a popular television game show , ' ' The Diamond Head Game ' ' , was contested on the grounds of Del Webb 's Kuilima Hotel ( today the Turtle Bay Resort ) , located just to the west . At the end of each show the announcer would say , If you plan to be in Hawaii , send a self-addressed , stamped envelope to the Diamond Head series ' ' North Shore ( TV series ) Places of interest in the area include beaches , hiking , fishing , art galleries , and several shrimp trucks in the vicinity . # Government and infrastructure # The Honolulu Police Department operates the Kahuku Substation in Kahuku. # Education # The Hawaii Department of Education operates the public schools . Kahuku Elementary School and Kahuku High &amp; Intermediate School are located in Kahuku CDP. 
 Steward is a village in Lee County , Illinois , United States . The population was 256 at the 2010 census , down from 271 at the 2000 census . # History # Steward , Illinois , was named for Wesley Steward , who in 1855 came to this area in Alto Township to settle the land owned by his father , Marcus Steward . John Grimes built the first house in Alto Township in Plum Thicket in 1847 , located east on the outskirts of the village as it is today . In 1861 , Mr. Steward married and built the first farm house in the location of Steward , which is still standing . The town is located in the west central part of Alto Township and the northeast part of Lee County . Mr. Steward was influential in getting the Chicago and Iowa Railroad , now known as the Burlington Northern , through the township extending from Hinckley , Illinois to Rochelle , Illinois completed in 1870 . The Village Hall on Main Street is one of the oldest buildings in existence and the jail one of the few reminders of the early days ( not used ) . In 1872 Mr. Steward built the first elevator at the east end of Main Street run by steam . The history of the elevators in Steward over the years is a story in itself . The first house in Steward after the town 's formation is on John Street , also standing today , built in 1872 . The railroad offices and warehouse were in Wesley Steward 's barn until 1871 , when the first depot was then built . It is said to have burned down in 1894 . The present depot , no longer in use by the Burlington Northern and in the process of being salvaged by a group in interested citizens of the village as a historical landmark , a museum , library , and social meeting place for anyone in the community , was built in 1896 . This project The Steward Illinois Depot Project , Inc. was being projected as a Bicentennial venture during the 1976 year . In 1902 Steward was selected as the junctional point for the Chicago , need for a railroad to run south out of Rockford , Illinois . The Milwaukee depot and switch tower for both railroads were on the northwest edge of town . The first businesses were a restaurant and general merchandise store built in 1871 . By the early 1900s , business houses were located on both sides of Main Street with a steady growth and expansion until the depression days when the town could then gradually see a decline in the businesses . The charter for the First National Bank of Steward was signed and issued on December 18 , 1902 . A new building was erected and business started January 2 , 1903 and continued till 1933 . The first Post Office was established at Heaton Aug. 31 , 1871 and located in the Steward depot . It was relocated in Steward April 12 , 1876 . Today it is located in the old bank building on Main Street . By 1976 , the village became mostly a residential community with the exception of the Post Office . # Geography # Steward is located at ( 41.848485 , -89.020671 ) . total area of , all land . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 271 people , 99 households , and 79 families residing in the village . The population density was 2,180.9 people per square mile ( 871.9/km ) . There were 103 housing units at an average density of 828.9 per square mile ( 331.4/km ) . The racial makeup of the village was 98.52% White , 0.37% African American , 0.74% from other races , and 0.37% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.06% of the population . There were 99 households out of which 34.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 66.7% were married couples living together , 11.1% had a female householder with no husband present , and 20.2% were non-families. 18.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.74 and the average family size was 3.06 . In the village the population was spread out with 28.8% 24 , 30.6% from 25 to 44 , 21.0% from 45 to 64 , and 13.7% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 35 years . For every 100 females there were 115.1 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 103.2 males . The median income for a household in the village was $46,071 , and the median income for a family was $51,500 . Males had a median income of $35,469 versus $25,625 for females . The per capita income for the village was $16,270 . About 2.5% of families and 4.5% of the population were below the poverty line , including 4.8% of those under the age of eighteen and 4.5% of those sixty five or over . # Notable people # Only people who already have a Wikipedia article may appear here . This establishes notability . The article must mention how they are associated with **11;1540;city , whether born , raised , or residing . The fact of their association should have a reliable source cited . Alphabetical by last name please . All others with the Chicago Cubs and Cincinnati Reds 
 blank1name = GNIS ID footnotes = Albion is a town in Albion and Jefferson townships , Noble County , Indiana , United States . The population was 2,349 at the 2010 census . The city is the county seat of Noble County . # School # Children living in Albion go to either Central Noble High School , Central Noble Middle School , or Albion Elementary School . # Geography # Albion is located at ( 41.395132 , -85.422026 ) . According to the 2010 census , the town has a total area of , all land . # Demographics # # 2010 census # As of the 2010 census , there were 2,349 people , 831 households , and 530 families residing in the town . The population density was 1229.8PD/sqmi PD/km2 . There were 951 housing units at an average density of 497.9/sqmi /km2 . The racial makeup of the town was 97.4% White , 0.4% African American , 0.2% Native American , 0.4% Asian , 0.6% from other races , and 1.1% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were which 35.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 44.0% were married couples living together , 14.4% had a female householder with no husband present , 5.3% had a male householder with no wife present , and 36.2% were non-families. 30.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.04 . The median age in the town was 35.3 years . 24.8% of residents were under the age of 18 ; 8.8% were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 30.1% were from 25 to 44 ; 22% were from 45 to 64 ; and 14.2% were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the town was 51.1% male and 48.9% female . # 2000 census # As of the 2000 census , there were 2,284 people , 846 households , and 555 families residing in the town . The population density was 1,636.5 people per square mile ( 629.9/km ) . There were 912 mile ( 251.5/km ) . The racial makeup of the town was 97.37% White , 0.92% African American , 0.35% Native American , 0.04% Asian , 0.88% from other races , and 0.44% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.31% of the population . There were 846 households out of which 37.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 47.8% were married couples living together , 12.6% had a female householder with no husband present , and 34.3% were non-families. 29.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 3.10 . In the town the population was spread out with 29.2% under the age of 18 , 10.3% from 18 to 24 , 33.2% from 25 to 44 , 17.0% from 45 to 64 , and 10.2% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 30 years . For every 100 females there were 110.7 males . For 108.2 males . The median income for a household in the town was $36,282 , and the median income for a family was $43,438 . Males had a median income of $31,473 versus $23,531 for females . The per capita income for the town was $16,405 . About 4.6% of families and 4.7% of the population were below the poverty line , including 6.7% of those under age 18 and 5.3% of those age 65 or over . # Notable natives # * Earl Butz ( died February 2 , 2008 ) , former United States Secretary of Agriculture * Donald H. Spangler , Naval officer , USS Spangler ( DE-696 ) named for him . 
 Walnut is a city in Crawford County , Kansas , United States . As of the 2010 census , the city population was 220. # History # Walnut was originally called Glenwood , and under the latter name laid out in 1871 . In 1874 , it was renamed Walnut after the Little Walnut Creek , on which it is located . The first post office at Walnut was established in April , 1873 . Prior to April , 1877 , the post office 's name was officially called Walnut Station . # Geography # Walnut is located at ( 37.600359 , -95.075867 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 1.00sqmi sqkm , of which , 0.99sqmi sqkm is land and 0.01sqmi sqkm is water . # Climate # The climate in this area is characterized by hot , humid summers and generally mild to cool winters . According to the Kppen Climate Classification system , Walnut has a humid subtropical climate , abbreviated Cfa on climate maps . # Demographics # # 2010 census # As of 84 households , and 57 families residing in the city . The population density was 222.2PD/sqmi PD/km2 . There were 108 housing units at an average density of 109.1/sqmi /km2 . The racial makeup of the city was 96.8% White , 1.8% Native American , 0.5% from other races , and 0.9% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.6% of the population . There were 84 households of which 40.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 53.6% were married couples living together , 9.5% had a female householder with no husband present , 4.8% had a male householder with no wife present , and 32.1% were non-families. 29.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.26 . The median age in the city was 30.8 years . 34.1% of residents were under the age of 18 ; 5.5% were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 30% were from 25 and 9.1% were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 49.1% male and 50.9% female . # 2000 census # As of the census of 2000 , there were 221 people , 91 households , and 55 families residing in the city . The population density was 223.1 people per square mile ( 86.2/km <sup> 2 </sup> ) . There were 116 housing units at an average density of 117.1 per square mile ( 45.2/km <sup> 2 </sup> ) . The racial makeup of the city was 98.19% White , 0.90% Asian , and 0.90% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.45% of the population . There were 91 households out of which 31.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 53.8% were married couples living together , 3.3% had a female householder with no husband present , and 38.5% were non-families. 36.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 16.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.43 and the population was spread out with 29.4% under the age of 18 , 9.0% from 18 to 24 , 24.9% from 25 to 44 , 23.5% from 45 to 64 , and 13.1% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 36 years . For every 100 females there were 106.5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 102.6 males . The median income for a household in the city was $24,000 , and the median income for a family was $37,083 . Males had a median income of $21,250 versus $23,750 for females . The per capita income for the city was $12,920 . About 3.3% of families and 10.6% of the population were below the poverty line , including none of those under the age of eighteen and 25.0% of those sixty five or over . # Economy # The economy of Walnut is mostly agricultural based . 
 Ida is a village in Caddo Parish , Louisiana , United States . The population was 258 at the 2000 census . It is part of the Shreveport&amp;ndash ; Bossier City Metropolitan Statistical Area . Ida and nearby Rodessa are the most northwesterly communities in Louisiana . # Geography # Ida is located at ( 33.002606 , -93.892931 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the village has a total area of 1.4 sqmi , all land . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 258 people , 117 households , and 80 families residing in the village . The population density was 185.4 inhabitants per square mile ( 71.7/km ) . There were 133 housing units at an average density of 95.6 per square mile ( 36.9/km ) . The racial makeup of the village was 97.67% White , 1.55% African American , 0.39% Native American , and 0.39% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.39% of the population . There were 117 households out of which 21.4% had children under the couples living together , 5.1% had a female householder with no husband present , and 30.8% were non-families. 28.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.21 and the average family size was 2.70 . In the village the population was spread out with 20.5% under the age of 18 , 5.0% from 18 to 24 , 21.3% from 25 to 44 , 29.5% from 45 to 64 , and 23.6% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 46 years . For every 100 females there were 92.5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 89.8 males . The median income for a household in the village was $26,667 , and the median income for a family was $32,778 . Males had a median income of $24,375 versus $20,781 for females . The per capita income for the village was $14,166 . About 21.1% of families and 22.0% of the population were below the poverty line , including of those sixty five or over . 
 subdivisiontype1 = State subdivisiontype2 = County Clinton is an unincorporated census-designated place ( CDP ) in Prince George 's County , Maryland , United States . Clinton was formerly known as Surrattsville until after the time of the American Civil War . The population of Clinton was 35,970 at the 2010 census . Clinton is historically known for its role in the American Civil War concerning the Abraham Lincoln assassination . Clinton is adjacent to Camp Springs , Rosaryville , Melwood , and Andrews Air Force Base . # Geography # Clinton is located at ( 38.763711 , -76.895458 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 64.9 km2 , of which 64.7 km2 is land and 0.2 sqkm , or 0.31% , is water . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 26,064 people , 8,605 households , and 6,772 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 2,208.6 people per square mile ( 852.8/km ) . There were 8,962 housing units at an average density of 759.4 per square mile was 20.56% White , 73.69% Black , 0.47% Native American , 2.47% Asian , 0.02% Pacific Islander , 0.72% from other races , and 2.08% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.90% of the population . There were 8,605 households out of which 38.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 58.8% were married couples living together , 15.2% had a female householder with no husband present , and 21.3% were non-families. 17.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 5.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.96 and the average family size was 3.32 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 27.2% under the age of 18 , 6.7% from 18 to 24 , 30.7% from 25 to 44 , 26.4% from 45 to 64 , and 9.1% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 37 years . For every 100 females there were 89.1 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , household in the CDP was $71,139 , and the median income for a family was $75,036 ( these figures had risen to $90,285 and $97,640 respectively as of a 2007 estimate ) . Males had a median income of $41,736 versus $39,545 for females . The per capita income for the CDP was $24,949 . About 2.4% of families and 3.4% of the population were below the poverty line , including 2.5% of those under age 18 and 10.2% of those age 65 or over . # History # Clinton was founded in the 1770s . The town , then named Surratt 's Villa , was actually a simple crossroads with a few buildings . In the 1800s , it became known as Surrattsville . The main building served as the post office , an inn and tavern , and a polling place . This main residence was one of two properties owned by the widowed Mary Surratt ; the second property was in Washington , D.C. On 14 and 15 April 1865 , John Wilkes Booth , who had two hours earlier assassinated President Abraham Lincoln , stopped by the U.S. government alleged that Mrs. Surratt had gone there earlier with these supplies , and was in collusion with the conspirators , one of whom was her son , John Surratt . Because she was found guilty of complicity in the Lincoln assassination , Mary Surratt was hanged at the Capitol Prison in Washington D.C. , on 7 July 1865 . ( Her house is now the Surratt House Museum , with a focus on the assassination . ) The U.S. Post Office renamed the town Robeysville , due to the notoriety of the Surratt name , and in keeping with naming towns after the post master . In 1879 , Robeysville was renamed Clinton . The local high school , however , retains the name of Surrattsville , and some locals continue , in common usage , to call the town Surattsville . Also a part of Clinton 's history is the Wyoming house , a historic frame house that consists of three separate and distinct sections : the main block built in the third quarter of the 18th century , a c.1800 kitchen , and a connecting two-bay section of Maryland 's gambrel-roofed colonial architecture , and is more specifically noteworthy as an excellent example of southern Maryland tidewater architecture . It was also the ancestral home of the Marburys , a family which produced many of Maryland 's political , professional , and judicial leaders through the 18th , 19th , and 20th centuries . In 1913 , B.K. Miller founded a general store at the main intersection in the town which still exists today as one of the largest liquor stores in southern Prince Georges County . It is still owned by the Miller family . Clinton has mostly single-family housing , but includes a few townhouse developments and one retirement mid-rise . Southern Maryland Regional Hospital is in Clinton , as is a private airfield . Louise F. Cosca Regional Park , a public facility operated by the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission , offers camping , hiking , fishing in a lake , an excellent playground , and a nature museum with nature activities . Clinton boasts a major shopping complex as well , and has a large fringe parking lot nearby where Metro buses of the Washington Metrorail system . There are more shopping centers yet to be built . Clinton is also home to the James O. Hall Research Center which is located on the premises of the Surratts House . Major local growth began in the 1950s , spurred partly by the expansion of adjacent Andrews Air Force Base , home of the Air Force Systems Command and the President 's plane Air Force One . Clinton is the hometown of Maryland State Senate President Thomas V. Mike Miller , Jr . ( a few years ago he moved to Calvert County , but still has a Clinton law office ) ; the Miller family is well known in the area . Academy Award-winning actress Marcia Gay Harden attended Surrattsville High School and graduated in 1976 . She won the Oscar for Best Supporting Actress for ' ' Pollock ' ' in 2001 and was also nominated for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in ' ' Mystic River ' ' in 2003 . Another member of the Surrattsville High School Class of 1976 was baritone Gordon Hawkins , who has won critical the world . Clinton is where soap opera actress Laura Wright grew up . She graduated from Surrattsville High School in 1988 . Clinton is also where R&amp;B singer Tank grew up . NFL running back Brian Westbrook , known for playing for the Philadelphia Eagles and currently playing for the San Francisco 49ers , grew up in Clinton . A movie titled ' ' The Photon Effect ' ' was filmed in the town and also in Baltimore . A movie titled ' ' Safehouse ' ' was filmed in Clinton in 2007 . Among the actors who flew out from Los Angeles to act in the film was Luke Barnett , who grew up in Clinton and graduated from Grace Brethren Christian School in 2000. # Education # Clinton schools spend $6,986 per student . By average , there are 18 pupils per teacher , 789 students per librarian , and 431 children per counselor in Clinton ( zip 20735 ) , MD schools . # Primary and secondary schools # # #Public schools# # Prince George 's County Public Schools operates public schools that serve the area . , Temple Hills ) * Francis T. Evans Elementary School ( 6720 Old Alexander Ferry Road , Clinton ) * James Ryder Randall Elementary School ( 5410 Kirby Road , Clinton ) * Waldon Woods Elementary School ( 10301 Thrift Road , Clinton ) Middle schools : * Stephen Decatur Middle School ( 8200 Pinewood Drive ) High schools : * Surrattsville High School ( 6101 Garden Drive ) Special schools : * Tanglewood Regional Center ( 8333 Woodyard Road ) # #Private schools# # * Grace Brethren Christian Church and School ( 6501 Surratts Road ) ; this building was originally built as the first Surrattsville High School , and then became Surrattsville Junior High School before it was sold to Grace Brethren . * St. John the Evangelist School ( 8912 Old Branch Avenue ) for grades Pre-K through 8 opened in 1961. * Independent Baptist Academy - ( Piscataway Road ) Grades K-4 and up . * Clinton Christian School # Notable people # * Ty Lawson , American basketball player and point guard for the Denver Nuggets. 
 elevationfootnotes = cite web populationdensitykm2 = footnotes = Marum ( ) is a municipality and a town in the northeastern Netherlands . # Population centres # Boerakker , Jonkersvaart , Lucaswolde , Marum , Niebert , Noordwijk , Nuis , De Wilp. # Topography # ' ' Dutch Topographic map of the municipality of Marum , 2013. ' ' 
 Ambt Montfort ( ) is a former municipality in the Dutch province of Limburg . In 1991 , the municipalities of Montfort , Posterholt , Reutje and Sint Odilinberg merged . The original name of the merged municipality was Posterholt , but it was changed in Ambt Montfort in 1994 . On January 1 , 2007 , Ambt Montfort merged into the municipality of Roerdalen. 
 Foster Township is a township in Big Stone County , Minnesota , United States . The population was 123 as of the 2000 census . # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the township has a total area of 33.2 sqmi , of which 30.1 sqmi is land and 3.1 sqmi ( 9.43% ) is water . # Unincorporated towns # * Bonanza Grove , Minnesota * Foster , Minnesota * Yankeetown , Minnesota ( This list is based on USGS data and may include former settlements. ) # Major highways # * # Lakes # * Big Stone Lake ( northwest quarter ) # Adjacent townships # * Browns Valley Township ( north ) * Toqua Township ( northeast ) * Prior Township ( east ) # Cemeteries # The township contains these two cemeteries : Holden and Lakeside . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 123 people , 57 households , and 42 families residing in the township . The population density was 4.1 people per square mile ( 1.6/km ) . There were 169 housing ) . The racial makeup of the township was 98.37% White and 1.63% Asian . There were 57 households out of which 15.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 70.2% were married couples living together , and 26.3% were non-families. 24.6% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.16 and the average family size was 2.50 . In the township the population was spread out with 15.4% under the age of 18 , 5.7% from 18 to 24 , 15.4% from 25 to 44 , 40.7% from 45 to 64 , and 22.8% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 52 years . For every 100 females there were 141.2 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 126.1 males . The median income for a household in the township was $31,875 , and the median income for a family was $41,250 . Males had a median income of $22,500 versus $22,083 for females . There were 17.5% of families and 18.4% of the population living below the poverty line , including 19.0% of under eighteens and none of those over 64. 
 Lac qui Parle Township is a township in Lac qui Parle County , Minnesota , United States . The population was 183 at the 2000 census . # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the township has a total area of 31.5 sqmi , of which 28.7 sqmi of it is land and 2.8 sqmi of it ( 8.79% ) is water . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 183 people , 69 households , and 54 families residing in the township . The population density was 6.4 people per square mile ( 2.5/km ) . There were 103 housing units at an average density of 3.6/sq mi ( 1.4/km ) . The racial makeup of the township was 100.00% White . There were 69 households out of which 40.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 75.4% were married couples living together , 1.4% had a female householder with no husband present , and 21.7% were non-families. 20.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 5.8% had someone living alone who household size was 2.65 and the average family size was 3.09 . In the township the population was spread out with 29.5% under the age of 18 , 6.0% from 18 to 24 , 24.6% from 25 to 44 , 29.0% from 45 to 64 , and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 40 years . For every 100 females there were 98.9 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 108.1 males . The median income for a household in the township was $33,906 , and the median income for a family was $38,750 . Males had a median income of $31,667 versus $21,875 for females . The per capita income for the township was $16,769 . About 11.5% of families and 15.0% of the population were below the poverty line , including 18.4% of those under the age of eighteen and 9.5% of those sixty five or over . # Notable people # *Theodore Christianson - 21st Governor of Minnesota ; born in Lac qui Parle Township 
 Vail Township is one of the twenty-six townships of Redwood County , Minnesota , United States . The population was 310 at the 2000 census . # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the township has a total area of 35.2 square miles ( 91.2 km ) ; 35.0 square miles ( 90.8 km ) of it is land and 0.2 square miles ( 0.4 km ) of it ( 0.45% ) is water . The city of Wabasso is located in Vail Township . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 310 people , 84 households , and 72 families residing in the township . The population density was 8.8 people per square mile ( 3.4/km ) . There were 89 housing units at an average density of 2.5/sq mi ( 1.0/km ) . The racial makeup of the township was 99.68% White , and 0.32% from two or more races . There were 84 households out of which 48.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 82.1% were married couples living together , and 13.1% were non-families. 13.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 2.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 3.23 and the average family size was 3.51 . In the township the population was spread out with 33.5% under the age of 18 , 4.8% from 18 to 24 , 19.0% from 25 to 44 , 22.3% from 45 to 64 , and 20.3% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 39 years . For every 100 females there were 113.8 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 98.1 males . The median income for a household in the township was $37,500 , and the median income for a family was $38,036 . Males had a median income of $24,375 versus $20,500 for females . The per capita income for the township was $12,633 . None of the families and 0.8% of the population were living below the poverty line , including no under eighteens and none of those over 64. 
 Milford is a village in Barton County , Missouri , United States . The population was 26 at the 2010 census . # History # Milford was platted in 1869. # Geography # Milford is located at ( 37.585337 , -94.157818 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the village has a total area of 0.04sqmi sqkm , all of it land . # Demographics # # 2010 census # As of the census of 2010 , there were 26 people , 14 households , and 7 families residing in the village . The population density was 650.0PD/sqmi PD/km2 . There were 23 housing units at an average density of 575.0/sqmi /km2 . The racial makeup of the village was 100.0% White . There were 14 households of which 21.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 35.7% were married couples living together , 7.1% had a female householder with no husband present , 7.1% had a male householder with no wife present , and 50.0% were non-families. 50.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 28.5% had someone . The average household size was 1.86 and the average family size was 2.57 . The median age in the village was 55.5 years . 11.5% of residents were under the age of 18 ; 3.8% were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 15.3% were from 25 to 44 ; 38.3% were from 45 to 64 ; and 30.8% were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the village was 50.0% male and 50.0% female . # 2000 census # As of the census of 2000 , there were 52 people , 20 households , and 15 families residing in the village . The population density was 1,288.2 people per square mile ( 501.9/km ) . There were 26 housing units at an average density of 644.1 per square mile ( 251.0/km ) . The racial makeup of the village was 98.08% White , and 1.92% from two or more races . There were 20 households out of which 25.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 55.0% were married couples living together , 15.0% had a female householder with no households were made up of individuals and 5.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.60 and the average family size was 2.87 . In the village the population was spread out with 23.1% under the age of 18 , 13.5% from 18 to 24 , 23.1% from 25 to 44 , 26.9% from 45 to 64 , and 13.5% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 40 years . For every 100 females there were 92.6 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 110.5 males . The median income for a household in the village was $26,875 , and the median income for a family was $19,167 . Males had a median income of $22,917 versus $16,250 for females . The per capita income for the village was $12,303 . There were 28.6% of families and 20.0% of the population living below the poverty line , including 33.3% of under eighteens and none of those over 64. 
 Hart 's Location is a town in Carroll County , New Hampshire , United States . Since 1948 , the town has been one of the first places to declare its results for the New Hampshire Presidential primary and U.S. Presidential elections . Native Americans used a trail up the Saco River valley through Crawford Notch , and during the French and Indian Wars , many English captives were taken to Canada that way . But the pass through the White Mountains was otherwise unknown until 1771 , when Timothy Nash discovered it hunting moose , and told Governor John Wentworth . The obscure Indian trail transformed into the Cos Road , on which was built a small public house in 1793 . It was abandoned , but in 1825 Samuel Willey , Jr . occupied it with his wife , five children , and two hired hands . During a violent storm on August 28 , 1826 , they all perished in a landslide known as Willey 's Slide . They fled their home and took refuge in a shelter , but it was destroyed while the slide , which flowed around the home and reunited below it . The door was found gaping , a bible open on the table . Their tragedy inspired The Ambitious Guest ( 1835 ) by Nathaniel Hawthorne , and Mount Willey was named in their memory . The house became part of a larger inn , then burned in 1898 . Today , the location is a state historic site . In 1875 , the Portland and Ogdensburg Railroad completed its line up through Crawford Notch . Passengers thrilled to traverse the Frankenstein Trestle , 520 feet ( 158 meters ) long and 85 feet ( 26 meters ) above the ravine floor , and then the Willey Brook Bridge , 400 feet ( 122 meters ) long and 94 feet ( 29 meters ) high . Later part of the Mountain Division of the Maine Central Railroad , the route is still traveled by the Conway Scenic Railroad . # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 48.1 sqkm , of which 47.9 sqkm is land and 0.3 sqkm , 's Location is unusual : about 11 mi long and 1.5 mi wide , with crooked boundaries that echo the confines of Crawford Notch , threaded by the upper Saco River and U.S. Route 302 near the centerline of the town , and pinched from both sides between steep mountains and in some areas sheer cliffs above . This anomaly is heightened on maps that show county lines : Coos County lies immediately to the east and Grafton County to the west , but Hart 's Location is part of Carroll County , though barely connected to it . The highest point in Hart 's Location is 3900 ft above sea level along the town 's western boundary , beneath the summit of 4285ft m Mount Willey . Arethusa Falls , New Hampshire 's highest waterfall , located in the neighboring township of Livermore , is a popular hiking destination with access from U.S. Route 302 in Hart 's Location . The town lies fully within the Saco River watershed . The town is a popular ice climbing destination in the winter months . # Demographics # As of the census , and 10 families residing in the location . The population density was 2.0 people per square mile ( 0.8/km ) . There were 50 housing units at an average density of 2.7 per square mile ( 1.0/km ) . The racial makeup of the location was 97.30% ( 36 people ) White , with 2.70% ( one person ) citing themselves as from two or more races . There were 15 households out of which 33.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 66.7% were married couples living together , and 33.3% were non-families. 26.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 3.10 . In the location the population was spread out with 24.3% under the age of 18 , 5.4% from 18 to 24 , 35.1% from 25 to 44 , 8.1% from 45 to 64 , and 27.0% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 39 years . For every females age 18 and over , there were 100.0 males . The median income for a household in the location was $41,250 , and the median income for a family was $70,833 . Males had a median income of $26,250 versus $28,750 for females . The per capita income for the town was $19,609 . None of the population and none of the families were below the poverty line . # Politics # # Federal elections # New Hampshire law allows towns with fewer than 100 residents to open the polls at midnight and close them as soon as all registered voters have cast their ballots . Hart 's Location is , along with Dixville Notch , one of two New Hampshire communities where the first votes are cast in the Democratic and Republican New Hampshire primaries , the first presidential primaries in the United States during each presidential election year . The Hart 's Location midnight voting tradition , which began in 1948 , actually predates the more widely known Dixville Notch practice ; however , Dixville Notch generally receives greater publicity because Hart 's Location discontinued the practice in community 's voting tradition received a nod in the 2002 third season episode of US television program ' ' The West Wing ' ' , in an episode entitled Hartsfield 's Landing , named after a town clearly modeled on either Hart 's Location , or its companion , Dixville Notch . # #Election results# # Boldfaced names indicate the ultimate nationwide winner of each contest : # #1996# # # #2000# # # #2004# # # #2008# # # #2012# # # Emergency services # Police Services are provided by the Carroll County Sheriff 's Office or NH State Police Troop E depending on staffing for the time of day . 
 footnotes = Tinton Falls is a borough in Monmouth County , New Jersey , United States . As of the 2010 United States Census , the borough 's population was 17,892 , an increase of 2,839 ( +18.9% ) from the 15,053 counted in the 2000 Census , which had in turn increased by 2,692 ( +21.8% ) from the 12,361 counted in the 1990 Census . The borough was formed as New Shrewsbury by an act of the New Jersey Legislature on August 15 , 1950 , based on the results of a referendum held on July 18 , 1950 , after breaking away from Shrewsbury Township . It was renamed Tinton Falls in 1975 , to avoid postal errors . The name came from Lewis Morris 's plantation , Tinton Manor , which employed free white workers and slaves . The borough is home to the highest waterfall on New Jersey 's coastal plain . # History # The area that is now known as Tinton Falls was originally settled in the late 1600s , probably beginning with the initial land purchases from the Lenni Lenape were likely the incentives that encouraged settlement : shortly after the land was purchased , a man by the name of James Grover had an ironworks built along the river . Grover was likely the founder of the community , which , in the 1600s , was named New Shrewsbury . At this time , the waterfall was known to be about high ; erosion and the destruction of the dam near the ironworks have led to its diminishment. # The ironworks # Grovers ironworks was the central fixture of the community , and it was one of the oldest built in the country , predated only by buildings in Jamestown and Massachusetts . In 1675 , a half-interest in the ironworks company was purchased by Colonel Lewis Morris , who obtained a title granting him 3540 acre along the Shrewsbury River . Morris also obtained land owned by Bartholomew Applegate , who had built a corn mill on the other side of the river . Morris , who procured the land for iron mining , named his holdings Tintern Manor , after his family lands in Monmouthshire , England . often accepted as the namesake of Tinton Falls . In 1691 , Colonel Morris died , leaving Tinton Manor ( a corruption of Tintern Manor ) and the ironworks to his nephew of the same name . By 1714 , the ironworks had become less profitable , but mention of a Tinton Falls ironworks can be found as late as 1844. # Separation from Shrewsbury Township # In 1693 , Tinton Manor and the surrounding lands were defined as part of Shrewsbury Township . At this time , Shrewsbury included all of the land in eastern Monmouth County . Shrewsbury Township became Shrewsbury Borough in 1926 , after many of the municipalities in eastern Monmouth County split from the township . In July 1950 , Tinton Falls and Wayside left Shrewsbury Borough , renaming themselves the Borough of New Shrewsbury . To avoid postal confusion and mix-ups with the surrounding borough and township of Shrewsbury , the residents of New Shrewsbury voted to rename the community as The Borough of Tinton Falls in 1975. # Geography # Tinton Falls is located at ( 40.266688 , -74.098746 ) . According to the total area of 15.623 square miles ( 40.463 km <sup> 2 </sup> ) , of which , 15.487 square miles ( 40.110 km <sup> 2 </sup> ) of it is land and 0.136 square miles ( 0.352 km <sup> 2 </sup> ) of it ( 0.87% ) is water . # Demographics # # Census 2010 # The Census Bureau 's 2006-2010 American Community Survey showed that ( in 2010 inflation-adjusted dollars ) median household income was $78,894 ( with a margin of error of +/- $4,470 ) and the median family income was $99,231 ( +/- $8,633 ) . Males had a median income of $72,478 ( +/- $8,954 ) versus $53,956 ( +/- $7,492 ) for females . The per capita income for the borough was $40,149 ( +/- $2,077 ) . About 3.2% of families and 4.1% of the population were below the poverty line , including 6.2% of those under age 18 and 3.7% of those age 65 or over . # Census 2000 # As of the 2000 United States Census there were 15,053 people , 5,883 households , and 3,976 families residing in the borough ( 372.8/km <sup> 2 </sup> ) . There were 6,211 housing units at an average density of 398.4 per square mile ( 153.8/km <sup> 2 </sup> ) . The racial makeup of the borough was 78.80% White , 13.04% African American , 0.24% Native American , 4.96% Asian , 0.01% Pacific Islander , 1.04% from other races , and 1.90% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4.70% of the population . There were 5,883 households out of which 34.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 56.0% were married couples living together , 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present , and 32.4% were non-families. 27.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 3.11 . In the borough the population was spread out with 25.5% under the age of 18 , 5.2% from 18 to 24 , 36.4% from 25 to 44 , 22.1% from 45 to 64 , and The median age was 37 years . For every 100 females there were 90.6 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 86.2 males . The median income for a household in the borough was $68,697 , and the median income for a family was $79,773 . Males had a median income of $58,098 versus $37,857 for females . The per capita income for the borough was $31,520 . About 2.6% of families and 3.9% of the population were below the poverty line , including 4.3% of those under age 18 and 3.3% of those age 65 or over . # Government # # Local government # The Borough of Tinton Falls operates under the Faulkner Act , using the Mayor-Council form of municipal government ( Plan 6 ) , implemented by direct petition as of July 1 , 1985 . The Mayor is the Chief Executive Officer of the Borough and is elected for a four-year term . The Borough Business Administrator reports to , and may act on behalf of the Mayor , in the Mayor 's absence . The Borough Council is the for four-year terms on a staggered basis , with either two or three seats up for election every other year as part of the November general election , with the mayoral seat up for vote at the same time that two council seats are being chosen by voters . The Borough Council voted in May 2010 to shift its non-partisan elections from May to the November general election , as part of an effort to increase participation of voters and to cut costs associated with the May elections , with savings estimated at nearly $100,000 during the first decade after the change was implemented in the November 2011 vote . , the mayor of Tinton Falls is Gerald M. Turning , whose term of office ends December 31 , 2017 . Members of the Borough Council are Council President Gary Baldwin ( 2015 ) , Deputy Council President Christopher Pak ( 2015 ) , Scott Larkin ( 2017 ) , John Roche ( 2017 ) , and Steven P. Schertz ( 2015 ) . # Federal , state and county representation # Tinton Falls is located in the 4th Congressional District district . Prior to the 2011 reapportionment following the 2010 Census , Tinton Falls had been in the 12th state legislative district . Prior to the 2010 Census , Tinton Falls had been part of the , a change made by the New Jersey Redistricting Commission that took effect in January 2013 , based on the results of the November 2012 general elections . # Politics # As of March 23 , 2011 , there were a total of 12,196 registered voters in Tinton Falls , of which 3,425 ( 28.1% ) were registered as Democrats , 2,731 ( 22.4% ) were registered as Republicans and 6,033 ( 49.5% ) were registered as Unaffiliated . There were 7 voters registered to other parties . In the 2008 presidential election , Democrat Barack Obama received 51.9% of the vote here ( 5,065 cast ) , ahead of Republican John McCain with 45.9% ( 4,483 votes ) and other candidates with 1.1% ( 104 votes ) , among the 9,763 ballots cast by the borough 's 12,498 registered voters , for a turnout of 78.1% . In the 2004 presidential election , Republican 4,476 ballots cast ) , outpolling Democrat John Kerry with 48.0% ( 4,236 votes ) and other candidates with 0.6% ( 72 votes ) , among the 8,825 ballots cast by the borough 's 11,432 registered voters , for a turnout percentage of 77.2 . In the 2009 gubernatorial election , Republican Chris Christie received 56.9% of the vote here ( 3,740 ballots cast ) , ahead of Democrat Jon Corzine with 35.1% ( 2,307 votes ) , Independent Chris Daggett with 6.6% ( 437 votes ) and other candidates with 0.8% ( 51 votes ) , among the 6,576 ballots cast by the borough 's 12,354 registered voters , yielding a 53.2% turnout . # Fire departments # Tinton Falls is covered by four fire companies , split into two fire districts . Wayside Fire Company ( 36-2 ) , founded in 1919 , and Pinebrook Fire Company ( 36-3 ) are in Fire District 1 . Tinton Falls Fire Company No. 1 ( 36-1 ) , established in 1932 , and Northside Engine Company ( 36-4 ) , founded in 1955 , which make up Fire District 2. # attend the three schools in the Tinton Falls School District , together with students from the neighboring community of Shrewsbury Township and the dependent children of military families based at Naval Weapons Station Earle . All three of the district 's schools are located in Tinton Falls . Shrewsbury Township is represented with one seat out of nine on the district 's board of education . As of the 2011-12 school year , the district 's three schools had an enrollment of 1,553 students and 130.7 classroom teachers ( on an FTE basis ) , for a studentteacher ratio of 11.88:1 . Schools in the district ( with 2011-12 enrollment data from the National Center for Education Statistics ) are Mahala F. Atchison Elementary School ( Grades K-3 , 665 students ) , Swimming River Elementary School ( Grades 4-5 , 352 students ) and Tinton Falls Middle School ( Grades 6-8 , 536 students ) . Students in public school for ninth through twelfth grades attend Monmouth Regional High School , located in Tinton Falls . The school serves students from Eatontown , Shrewsbury Township , Tinton Falls , and year , the school served 1,008 students . Students may also apply to attend one of the magnet schools in the Monmouth County Vocational School District -- Marine Academy of Science and Technology , Academy of Allied Health &amp; Science , High Technology High School , Biotechnology High School , and Communications High School . Ranney School is a coeducational , nonsectarian K-12 private school founded in 1960 , and its campus occupies 60 acre off of Hope Road . # Transportation # # Roads and highways # The borough had a total of of roadways , of which are maintained by the municipality , by Monmouth County , by the New Jersey Department of Transportation and by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority . Passing through Tinton Falls are the Garden State Parkway , Route 18 , Route 33 , and Route 66 . Tinton Falls houses exits 100 ( including the Monmouth Service Area ) , 102 , 105 , and 109 on the parkway , including a high-speed toll gate , and the southern start/end of the express and local carriageways , although the borough is listed only on through Tinton Falls are County Route 537 ( Tinton Avenue ) which crosses the northern portion of the borough from Colts Neck Township in the west to Eatontown in the east , and County Route 547 ( Shafto Road ) , which enters from Wall Township at the borough 's southwest corner and proceeds northeast towards Eatontown. # Public transportation # New Jersey Transit offers train service on the North Jersey Coast Line at the Red Bank . NJ Transit local bus service is available on the 833 and 836 routes . # Points of interest # *Old Mill at Tinton Falls - constructed in 1676 , the site was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1973. *Frozen Ropes , a baseball training center . *Twin Brook Golf Center , a public 9-hole golf course , 18-hole minigolf course , and driving range . *Jersey Shore Premium Outlets , an outdoor shopping mall that opened in November 2008 with 120 outlet stores and a food court , offering a gross leasable area of . *Tinton Falls Library , one of the branches part of the Monmouth County Library Library Association , the name was changed to its current title in 1975. *Overlook by the Falls , located near the town 's waterfalls ( the namesake for the town ) and wildlife area , where trails have been added to allow visitors to view the falls and wildlife . *Borough parks include Hockhockson Park , with three baseball fields and basketball courts , Liberty II Park , with two football fields , a softball field and basketball courts , Riverdale West Park , with two soccer fields and a basketball court and the Sycamore Recreation Complex , which offers six lighted multi-purpose fields , among the borough 's other parks and recreation facilities . # Notable people # People who were born in , residents of , or otherwise closely associated with Tinton Falls include : * Alan Garcia ( born 1985 ) , thoroughbred horse racing jockey . * Robert Giroux ( 1914-2008 ) , book editor and publisher who was a partner in what became known as Farrar , Straus and Giroux. * Sean Goldman , 9-year-old boy in the center of an international custody case between his Paulo Lins e Silva . The case was focus of international media coverage and was object of deliberation during meetings of high level Brazilian and American officials . * Milton Goode ( born 1960 ) , retired high jumper who represented the United States at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles . * Michelle Leonardo ( born 1990 ) , winner of Miss New Jersey Teen USA in 2008 and Miss New Jersey USA in 2012 , who placed in the top ten at the Miss USA 2012 pageant . * Amir Meshal , American who was detained by the Ethiopian military in early 2007 while he was fighting alongside the Union of Islamic Courts militias in Somalia . * Ivy Troutman ( 1884-1979 ) , Broadway actress . * Dorothy Young ( 19072011 ) , entertainer , stage assistant to magician Harry Houdini . * Daryn Zhunussov ( born 1991 ) , ice dancer from Kazakhstan . 
 German Flatts is a town in Herkimer County , New York , United States . The population was 13,258 at the 2010 census . The Town of German Flatts is in the south part of Herkimer County , on the south side of the Mohawk River , across from the of Village of Herkimer and southeast of Utica. # History # # Herkimer # This was one of the original areas of the Burnetsfield Patent in the province of New York , where in 1722-1723 , Governor Burnet granted Palatine German immigrants leases to purchase land from the Mohawk , one of the powerful nations of the Iroquois Confederacy . It was the first land sold to Europeans west of Schenectady . During the 18th-century warfare in the valley , the village was attacked by French and Iroquois forces during the French and Indian War ( Seven Years ' War ) , and many women and children were taken to Canada as captives . On September 17 , 1778 Mohawk Indian chief and British Loyalist leader Joseph Brant leads a force of 150 Iroquois Indians and 300 British surprise attack on the area of German Flats , New York . German Flats , now known as Herkimer , New York , was left virtually undefended by Patriot troops prior to the raid . The Indian and Loyalist raiders captured hundreds of head of cattle and sheep before setting fire to every house , barn and mill in German Flats . Despite the complete destruction of the town , including 63 houses , 57 barns , three gristmills and one sawmill , only three men were killed . The day before , four Patriot scouts had run into the Loyalists while on reconnaissance . Though only one , Adam Helmer , survived the encounter , he was able to run the nine miles back to the village of German Flats to warn the residents . As a result , the vast majority of the town 's people was able to seek safety in the area 's forts , Herkimer and Dayton , and survived the destruction of their town . The town was set apart in the now defunct Tryon County , which was broken up into Montgomery and other a town in 1788 before the formation of Herkimer County . Previous to the establishment , the area that was to become the town had also been called ' ' German Flatts ' ' . # Towns # In 1791 , when Herkimer County was established , German Flatts was one of the three original towns . Three new towns were created from German Flatts in 1792 : Frankfort , Litchfield , and Warren . Another part of German Flatts was used in 1829 to form part of the Town of Little Falls . # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 34.3 sqmi , of which , 33.7 sqmi of it is land and 0.5 sqmi of it ( 1.52% ) is water . The north town line is marked by the Mohawk River and the Erie Canal . The New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 ) crosses the northeast part of the town . New York State Route 5S passes through the northern part of German Flatts and intersects New York State Route 28 in Mohawk village . from Mohawk village . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 13,629 people , 5,483 households , and 3,591 families residing in the town . The population density was 403.9 people per square mile ( 156.0/km ) . There were 5,832 housing units at an average density of 172.8 per square mile ( 66.7/km ) . The racial makeup of the town was 97.87% White , 0.59% African American , 0.11% Native American , 0.18% Asian , 0.01% Pacific Islander , 0.20% from other races , and 1.04% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.44% of the population . There were 5,483 households out of which 31.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 48.6% were married couples living together , 12.2% had a female householder with no husband present , and 34.5% were non-families. 28.8% of all households were made up of individuals and 14.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 3.00 . In the age of 18 , 8.3% from 18 to 24 , 26.7% from 25 to 44 , 23.4% from 45 to 64 , and 16.4% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 38 years . For every 100 females there were 88.7 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 85.4 males . The median income for a household in the town was $32,772 , and the median income for a family was $39,380 . Males had a median income of $29,973 versus $21,425 for females . The per capita income for the town was $14,870 . About 11.1% of families and 13.7% of the population were below the poverty line , including 16.8% of those under age 18 and 11.3% of those age 65 or over . # Communities and locations in German Flatts # * Days Rock &amp;ndash ; A hamlet near the center of the town on NY-168. * East Frankfort &amp;ndash ; A hamlet partly in the northeast corner of German Flatts . * Edicks &amp;ndash ; A hamlet in the southeast part of the town on near the north town line and the Mohawk River . *Ilion &amp;ndash ; The Village of Ilion is at the northwest border of German Flatts near the Mohawk River on NY-5S. * Kinne Corners &amp;ndash ; A location on the west town line . *Mohawk &amp;ndash ; The Village of Mohawk is at the north border of the town on NY-5S. * North Ilion &amp;ndash ; A community located north of Ilion village , next to the Mohawk River . * Rock Hill &amp;ndash ; An elevation in the southeast part of German Flatts . * Russell Park &amp;ndash ; A location southwest of Mohawk village . * Shoemaker Hill &amp;ndash ; An elevation in the eastern part of the town . * South Ilion &amp;ndash ; A hamlet in the southeast part of the town on NY-5S. # In popular culture # *Walter D. Edmonds ' novel , ' ' Drums Along the Mohawk ' ' ( 1936 ) , recounts the story of Adam Helmer 's run to save the village during the American Revolutionary War , together with an overview of the Germans ' colonial settlement along the same name , released in 1939 and directed by John Ford . 
 Hebron is a Administrative divisions of New York#Town # Geography # Hebron 's beautiful hills and valleys are part of the slate valley of the Upper Taconic Mountains ( ' ' Taghkanic , ' ' meaning ' in the trees ' ) , and part of the Great Appalachian Valley ( also known simply as the ' Great Valley ' ) . Thus , many of the main hills , valleys , creeks and roads run diagonally across Hebron in keeping with the general outlay of the Appalachians . Hebron is notably at once a nexus between valley regions within the ' Great Valley ' , and also between mountain regions . The nexus of the Champlain and Hudson Valleys ( described in greater detail below in the paragraph on watersheds ) is located here . The taller peaks of the Taconics are on the Vermont side of the border , and begin to dwindle comparatively into foothills in Hebron . Hebron can be described as the foothills between the Adirondack Mountains of New York , and the Taconic and Green Mountains of Vermont . Hebron thus is a lowlands dividing mountain areas . In an era of much water pollution , it is a good thing to be at the top end of watersheds . Hebron 's battles with water quality are internal rather than related to problems upstream . According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 56.4 sqmi , of which , 56.2 sqmi of it is land and 0.2 sqmi of it ( 0.32% ) is water . The east town line of Hebron is the Vermont Border , and the beginning of New England proper . The town of Salem is adjacent to the south . The towns of Argyle , Hartford and Granville ( famous for its colored slate ) make up the remaining border on western and northern edges . NY Route 22 is a north-south highway through the eastern part of the town , running roughly parallel to the Vermont border . Route 30 connects Salem to Hartford through the western part of Hebron . Route 31 , the longest road through Hebron , cuts across diagonally from Route 30 connecting West Hebron to between two major watersheds whose waters travel great distances in opposite directions , only to rejoin ultimately in the Atlantic Ocean . The formal valleys and watersheds to which Hebron belongs are the following : Champlain Valley / Lake George Watershed02010001 ; Hudson River Valley / Hudson-Hoosic Watershed02020003 . Waters in the northernmost part of Hebron drain via the Mettawee River north into Lake Champlain , where they mix with waters from Lake George ( ' ' Horican ' ' ) and then flow into the Saint Lawrence River ( ' ' Kaniatarowanenneh ' ' ) . These Hebron waters mingle in the Saint Lawrence with waters of all the Great Lakes as they flow northeast into the Gulf of St. Lawrence , and ultimately join the Atlantic Ocean . Meanwhile , the majority of Hebron waters drain south via Black Creek into the Batten Kill ( ' ' Dionondehowa ' ' ) and then the Hudson River ( ' ' Muh-he-kun-ne-tuk ' ' or Muhheakantuck ) , and flow south into the Atlantic Ocean just below New York City . The two branches of Black Creek join in West Hebron after the waterfall in the West Branch of Black Creek ( which is just before Patterson Road ) . See map . See the approximation of the watershed divide mapped in context of mountains and valleys . See Washington County for a set of contextual maps . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 1,773 people , 687 households , and 489 families residing in the town . The population density was 31.5 people per square mile ( 12.2/km ) . There were 906 housing units at an average density of 16.1 per square mile ( 6.2/km ) . The racial makeup of the town was 97.18% White , 0.45% African American , 0.06% Native American , 0.45% Asian , 0.79% from other races , and 1.07% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.47% of the population . There were 687 households out of which 32.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 58.2% were married couples living together , 7.7% had a female householder with no husband present , and 28.8% were non-families. 22.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.02 . In the town the population was spread out with 27.1% under the age of 18 , 6.0% from 18 to 24 , 28.4% from 25 to 44 , 25.4% from 45 to 64 , and 13.2% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 38 years . For every 100 females there were 102.6 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 99.5 males . The median income for a household in the town was $37,639 , and the median income for a family was $41,680 . Males had a median income of $28,150 versus $22,315 for females . The per capita income for the town was $18,113 . About 7.0% of families and 9.7% of the population were below the poverty line , including 13.7% of those under age 18 and 9.4% of those age 65 or over . # History # In terms of European-American history , Hebron was first known as parcels of land , called patents , to soldiers who served in the French and Indian War ( 1754-1763 ) ( the North American front of the Seven Years ' War ) . Few soldiers settled in the area , and most of the land was acquired by land speculators . They sold off sold parcels to Yankee migrants and Scots-Irish immigrant settlers for farming . Some of the patents that form the town are Blundell and Sheriff . Originals of these patents are held by the National Archives . The town of Hebron was formed 23 March 1786 and was named by its Yankee settlers after Hebron , Connecticut . Its namesake is the biblical Hebron . This is the largest city in the present-day West Bank , 30 km south of Jerusalem . NY Route 22 , the main road on the east side of the town , began as The Great Northern Turnpike , chartered in 1799 . Two historic milepost markers remain in the town , one at 7047 State Route 22 , the second just north of Chamberlin Mills Road . A third is just south A peddlers wagon belonging to Lorenzo Levi Brown of Hebron is in the wagon collection of the Museum of Long Island at Stony Brook , New York . The town developed as an agricultural community , which it still is today . By 1864 , it was the chief potato-producing area of Washington County . Potatoes have been superseded by dairy farming . In recent decades , farms have been consolidated into larger operations . While the town has numerous residents whose families have been in the area for three generations , it also has new part-time residents who have second homes here . Others have retired here for the beauty of the area . # Hebron Volunteer Fire Company # The West Hebron Volunteer Fire Company was formed in 1947 . Willard Bain , a charter member , died in February 2008 . The first fire truck , BRUSH 356 , was put into service in 1947 and operated until 2008 . It was retired after the purchase that spring of a CAFS truck ATTACK 356 . In 1978 the East Hebron Fire Company was formed after the homes of donated the land and Greene led the group of volunteers who built Station Two . The two companies later merged to form the Hebron Volunteer Fire Company . The Hebron Volunteer Fire Company First Response Team provides emergency medical services to the town . These firefighters/ EMTs respond to medical and trauma-related calls . All first responders are currently licensed as EMTs by the State of New York . David Getty , a lifelong resident of Hebron , is Fire Chief . # Hebron Preservation Society # The Hebron Preservation Society was chartered by the State of New York in 1975 . The Society maintains a museum , with collections held in two historic buildings located on the east side of Route 22 in the hamlet of East Hebron . The former one-room school house built in 1845 was acquired from the Salem School District , and a small tenant farm house , built in the early 19th century , was purchased in 1990 . The Society published ' ' HEBRON : A Century In Review ' ' in 1988 , with a second edition in 2006 . The museum houses ledgers , books , and family genealogies pertaining to the residents , businesses and organizations in Hebron . # Beauty of Hebron potato # The Beauty of Hebron potato variety was promoted by a local seedsman , Edward L. Coy ( E.L . Coy ) . Both Coy and Rachel Campbell of Hebron took credit for the discovery . The variety was a naturally fertilized seedling of Garnet Chili . The earliest published reference to the Beauty of Hebron variety is from the 1876 Annual Agricultural Society Meeting in Marblehead , Massachusetts . The next year , in 1877 the US Department of Agriculture USDA introduced the Beauty of Hebron potato to growers in 26 states for tests . Various major seed companies of the time claimed credit for its commercial introduction , including J. M. Thornburn of New York City , JJH Gregory of Marblehead , and Peter Henderson of New Jersey . In 1879 Coy shipped Hebron Beauties to London . The Beauty of Hebron was one of the varieties used to restock the British Isles after the potato blight and Irish Potato Famine . Its use spread throughout New Caledonia . By the turn of the 20th century , it was also a favorite of market and home gardeners in the United States . In 1946 , the USDA did not list it in commercial production in the United States , but the 1959 ' ' Potato Variety Handbook ' ' of the American Potato Association includes the Beauty of Hebron . Most current tissue culture stocks and tubers came from Elmer Hansen of Alberta , Canada ; in 1988 he provided seed to Will Bownall and the Seedsavers organization , devoted to preserving historic varieties . The Beauty of Hebron is listed on the RAFT list of Threatened American Foods . The Beauty of Hebron is maintained at the Canadian Potato Research Center in Fredericton , New Brunswick , Canada ; the University of North Dakota Potato Breeding Program ; and with a commercial breeder . As of 2008 , it was not known if the potato variety was in commercial production . Due to Sally Brillion of the Hebron Preservation Society , amateur gardeners began to cultivate the Beauty of Hebron potato in 2006. # Notable natives born in Minerva , New York , he was a free black who had a farm in Hebron for a time . After moving to Saratoga Springs , New York , he was notable for having been kidnapped in 1841 and sold into slavery in Louisiana ; he regained freedom in 1853 after 12 years , and wrote and published a bestselling memoir that year , ' ' Twelve Years a Slave , ' ' about his trials . He became a lecturer on the abolitionist circuit . *Edward L. Coy ( 4 April 1831- ) was born in Hebron and was a lifelong resident at his farm on County Road 31 . For 18 years he was a breeder of Ayrshire cattle and for 13 years a breeder of the Holstein ( cattle ) : Coy raised more than a half million pounds of cucumber seed . For two years USDA employed him to establish the type seeds of the 250 varieties of cucumber to be tested by the department . : Coy initiated the seed industry in Hebron in the 1850s . The 1875 Census notes that he raised role in the development of the Golden Bantam sweet corn variety , the first major yellow sweet corn variety . *Hiram Barton , former Mayor of Buffalo , New York . # Locations in Hebron # There are seven hamlets in the town : Porter , Hebron , North Hebron , East Hebron , West Hebron , Belcher , and Slateville . North Hebron and Slateville are by far the best of the Hamlets . The Town Clerk 's office is located in West Hebron on County Route 30 as is the Hebron Volunteer Fire Company FireHall and Station One . Station Two is located on NY Route 22 south of the intersection of Sheldon Rd , Chamberlain Mill Road and NY-22 . Hebron has no school buildings or town center now , but there were hotels , postal offices , and many schools in the past . Students now go to schools in the surrounding towns , primarily Granville and Salem . The northeastern half of Hebron is in the Granville zipcode 12832 , and the bulk of the southwestern half is in the Salem zipcode 12865 . In 2008 Corners in the hamlet of West Hebron . # Communities # * Belcher &amp;ndash ; a hamlet near the west town line on County Road 30. * Castle Green &amp;ndash ; A location near the west town line . * East Hebron &amp;ndash ; A hamlet near the east town line on NY-22 . The Hebron District School No. 16 was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2012. * Hebron - **14;602086;<not * North Hebron &amp;ndash ; A hamlet near the north town line on County Road 31. * Porter &amp;ndash ; A community north of East Hebron on NY-22. * Slateville &amp;ndash ; A hamlet in the northeast part of Hebron on County Road 31 east of North Hebron . * Tiplady &amp;ndash ; A community south of East Hebron on NY-22. * West Hebron ( Chamberlain Mills ) &amp;ndash ; A hamlet in the southwest corner of the town on County Road 31 . The Hebron Valley Grange No. 1103 was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2006. # Geographical features # * Barkley 's Lake &amp;ndash ; A small lake north of parallel to NY-22 * Black Creek Falls &amp;ndash ; in West Hebron on the West Branch of Black Creek , just before Patterson Hill Road * Green Pond &amp;ndash ; A small lake northeast of Slateville. * Grimes Hill &amp;ndash ; An elevation in the north part of the town . * Hebron Mountain &amp;ndash ; A small mountain overlooking West Hebron from the northeast . * Irwin Road Pond &amp;ndash ; A small lake west of East Hebron . * Pine Hill &amp;ndash ; An elevation northeast of West Hebron . * Smith Pond &amp;ndash ; A small lake south of North Hebron . 
 Wales is a city in Cavalier County , North Dakota , United States . The population was 31 at the 2010 census . Wales was founded in 1897. # Geography # Wales is located at ( 48.894101 , -98.601778 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 0.23sqmi sqkm , all of it land . # Demographics # # 2010 census # As of the census of 2010 , there were 31 people , 13 households , and 10 families residing in the city . The population density was 134.8PD/sqmi PD/km2 . There were 20 housing units at an average density of 87.0/sqmi /km2 . The racial makeup of the city was 90.3% White , 3.2% from other races , and 6.5% from two or more races . There were 13 households of which 23.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 69.2% were married couples living together , 7.7% had a male householder with no wife present , and 23.1% were non-families. 23.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 23.1% had older . The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.80 . The median age in the city was 59.5 years . 25.8% of residents were under the age of 18 ; 0% were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 16.2% were from 25 to 44 ; 12.9% were from 45 to 64 ; and 45.2% were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 51.6% male and 48.4% female . # 2000 census # As of the census of 2000 , there were 30 people , 18 households , and 7 families residing in the city . The population density was 127.3 people per square mile ( 48.3/km ) . There were 31 housing units at an average density of 131.5 per square mile ( 49.9/km ) . The racial makeup of the city was 100.00% White . There were 18 households out of which 5.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 33.3% were married couples living together , 5.6% had a female householder with no husband present , and 61.1% were non-families. 22.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 1.67 and the average family size was 2.43 . In the city the population was spread out with 6.7% under the age of 18 , 10.0% from 18 to 24 , 13.3% from 25 to 44 , 30.0% from 45 to 64 , and 40.0% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 56 years . For every 100 females there were 150.0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 154.5 males . The median income for a household in the city was $15,000 , and the median income for a family was $30,000 . Males had a median income of $26,250 versus $0 for females . The per capita income for the city was $11,986 . There were no families and 28.6% of the population living below the poverty line , including no under eighteens and 60.0% of those over 64. # Notable people # Only people who already have a Wikipedia article may appear here . This establishes notability **11;35033;city , whether born , raised , or residing . The fact of their association should have a reliable source cited . Alphabetical by last name please . All others will be deleted . -- * Lucy Johnston Sypher , author of ' The Edge of Nowhere ' series , stories based in Wales . 
 Granville is a village in Licking County , Ohio , United States , founded by settlers from Granville , Massachusetts and Granby , Connecticut . It now has three times the population of its namesake . The population was 5,646 at the 2010 census . Granville is known for its New England character and historic architecture , including the Greek Revival Avery Downer House and many others . The Buxton Inn ( 1812 ) and the Granville Inn ( 1924 ) are two landmarks of Granville . The Village is home to Denison University . The Homestead at Denison University is a residential student intentional community focusing on environmental sustainability . Granville is the location of the prehistoric Alligator Effigy Mound , built by the indigenous people of the Fort Ancient culture , between 800 and 1200 CE , more than four hundred years before European contact . It may be an effigy of the underwater panther featured in Native American mythology . The mound is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . # Geography # Granville is located at ( 40.067520 , -82.512316 ) . has a total area of 4.71sqmi sqkm , of which , 4.68sqmi sqkm is land and 0.03sqmi sqkm is water . # Demographics # # 2010 census # As of the census of 2010 , there were 5,646 people , 1,441 households , and 1,017 families residing in the village . The population density was 1206.4PD/sqmi PD/km2 . There were 1,554 housing units at an average density of 332.1/sqmi /km2 . The racial makeup of the village was 91.9% White , 2.1% African American , 0.1% Native American , 3.6% Asian , 0.6% from other races , and 1.7% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.7% of the population . There were 1,441 households of which 36.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 59.3% were married couples living together , 7.9% had a female householder with no husband present , 3.4% had a male householder with no wife present , and 29.4% were non-families. 25.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The was 3.05 . The median age in the village was 22 years . 18.1% of residents were under the age of 18 ; 38.7% were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 12.1% were from 25 to 44 ; 21.4% were from 45 to 64 ; and 9.6% were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the village was 46.3% male and 53.7% female . # 2000 census # As of the census of 2000 , there were 3,167 people , 1,309 households , and 888 families residing in the village . The population density was 790.4 people per square mile ( 304.9/km ) . There were 1,384 housing units at an average density of 345.4 per square mile ( 133.3/km ) . The racial makeup of the village was 96.75% White , 0.69% African American , 0.28% Native American , 1.01% Asian , 0.16% from other races , and 1.11% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.14% of the population . There were 1,309 households out of which 33.4% had children under the age of 18 living with had a female householder with no husband present , and 32.1% were non-families. 28.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 3.00 . In the village the population was spread out with 27.0% under the age of 18 , 4.4% from 18 to 24 , 25.2% from 25 to 44 , 28.8% from 45 to 64 , and 14.7% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 42 years . For every 100 females there were 94.5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 87.7 males . The median income for a household in the village was $67,689 , and the median income for a family was $89,210 . Males had a median income of $72,250 versus $46,484 for females . The per capita income for the village was $39,221 . About 3.9% of families and 3.8% of the population were below the poverty line , including none of those under age # Notable natives and residents # * Hubert Howe Bancroft , an American historian and ethnologist * Jonathan Benjamin ( 17381841 ) last survivor of the French and Indian War . * Ernest DeWitt Burton , an American biblical scholar and president of the University of Chicago * Paul Carpenter , a minor league baseball player * Steve Carell , actor , attended Denison University * Edward Andrew Deeds , inventor and industrialist * Charles Griffin , a Union general in the American Civil War * Jennifer Garner , an actress , attended and graduated from Denison University * Ellen Hayes , astronomer and mathematician * Woody Hayes , a football coach and graduate of Denison University , before leaving to coach at Ohio State University * Lea Ann Parsley , Olympic silver medalist in the women 's skeleton at the 2002 Winter Olympics * Brian Unger , named one of ' ' Entertainment Weekly s 100 Most Creative People in Entertainment in 1998 * Willard Warner , a brigadier general in the Union Army during the American Civil War * Lee Wells , contemporary fine artist and curator * Scott 
 Perkins is a city in Payne County , Oklahoma , United States . The population was 2,831 at the 2010 census , an increase of 24.6 percent from 2,272 at the 2000 census . The name is derived from Walden Perkins , a congressman who helped establish the local post office . The Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma is headquartered here . # History # Perkins was founded during the Land Run in April 1889 . Joseph Wert staked a claim for 160 acres and offered up 40 acres of his land to be established as a township . The town went through three names in its first year- Cimarron , Italy , and then Perkins . It was named after Bishop Walden Perkins , a congressman from Kansas that pulled strings to establish the post office for the new township . The town of Perkins incorporated on August 25 , 1891 . Though Perkins was settled in 1889 , it celebrates Old Settlers Day around Sept 22 . This is the anniversary of the Land Run of 1891 . Being on the north side of the Cimarron River Run of 1891 . The first wagon bridge across the Cimarron River was built during the summer of 1891 . On September 22 , 1891 , the Sac and Fox and Iowa reservations officially opened . By January 1900 , the Eastern Oklahoma Railway began service , establishing the town as an agricultural trade center . # Geography # Perkins is located at . According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 2.2 sqmi , all of it land . Perkins is located on US Route 177 south of its junction with State Highway 33. # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 2,272 people , 913 households , and 644 families residing in the town . The population density was 1,018.4 people per square mile ( 393.4/km <sup> 2 </sup> ) . There were 988 housing units at an average density of 442.8 per square mile ( 171.1/km <sup> 2 </sup> ) . The racial makeup of the town was 85.48% White , 2.46% African American , 6.47% Native American , 0.31% Asian , 0.44% from other races , Latino of any race were 1.10% of the population . There were 913 households out of which 32.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 54.2% were married couples living together , 13.6% had a female householder with no husband present , and 29.4% were non-families. 27.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 10.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.49 and the average family size was 3.02 . In the town the population was spread out with 27.2% under the age of 18 , 9.2% from 18 to 24 , 28.8% from 25 to 44 , 20.8% from 45 to 64 , and 14.0% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 35 years . For every 100 females there were 91.6 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 81.5 males . The median income for a household in the town was $30,030 , and the median income for a family was $38,580 . Males had a median income of for the town was $14,955 . About 7.6% of families and 11.2% of the population were below the poverty line , including 12.8% of those under age 18 and 12.5% of those age 65 or over . # Notable people # *Jesse Barnes , baseball player *Frank Pistol Pete Eaton is also buried in Perkins . His house that he lived in is located in the Park located on 177 north of Perkins *Jeremy Hefner , pitcher for the New York Mets *Michael Atkins , professional golfer PGA Tour When you add a name in this section , it 's YOUR responsibility to ensure all of the following for each person : 1 ) Insert person into list sorted by last name ( surname ) . 2 ) Each person MUST meet Wikipedia:Bio requirements to ensure notability ( see Wikipedia:Notability ) . 3 ) Each person MUST meet Wikipedia:Verifiability requirements to verify their notability and prove they resided in the city . 4 ) If the person has a Wikipedia article , then wikilink the persons name to the correct wikipedia article , otherwise add citation reference(s) to prove notability and END OF INSTRUCTIONS *** -- 
 Cornwells Heights-Eddington was a census-designated place ( CDP ) in Bucks County , Pennsylvania , United States . The population was 3,406 at the 2000 census . For the 2010 census , the area was split into two CDPs , Cornwells Heights and Eddington , that are adjacent unincorporated communities within Bensalem Township . Cornwells Heights is located a bit southwest of Eddington . Both communities use the Bensalem ZIP code , 19020 . The CDP was bounded on the south by Interstate 95 , on the east by Street Road , on the north and west by Hulmeville Road , and on the west by Woodhaven Road . The Philadelphia city boundary is less than a mile to the west and north . The Delaware River is located to the south-southeast . Like neighboring Andalusia , the area consists of middle-class single-family homes along a series of grid-style streets . The main roads are generally accepted as Street Road , Hulmeville Road , and Brown Avenue . # History # The Little Jerusalem AME Church , St. Elizabeth 's Convent , and Trevose Manor are listed on Cornwells Heights-Eddington was located at ( 40.085343 , -74.946218 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP had a total area of 1.0 sqmi , all of it land . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 3,406 people , 1,193 households , and 888 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 3,332.5 people per square mile ( 1,289.3/km ) . There were 1,239 housing units at an average density of 1,212.3/sq mi ( 469.0/km ) . The racial makeup of the CDP was 96.80% White , 1.38% African American , 0.12% Native American , 1.09% Asian , 0.03% Pacific Islander , 0.18% from other races , and 0.41% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.53% of the population . There were 1,193 households out of which 29.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 59.4% were married couples living together , 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present , and 25.5% were non-families. 20.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.5% had older . The average household size was 2.79 and the average family size was 3.19 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 22.9% under the age of 18 , 7.4% from 18 to 24 , 27.5% from 25 to 44 , 25.2% from 45 to 64 , and 17.0% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 40 years . For every 100 females there were 96.4 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 94.2 males . The median income for a household in the CDP was $49,728 , and the median income for a family was $55,905 . Males had a median income of $41,614 versus $32,107 for females . The per capita income for the CDP was $24,171 . About 7.5% of families and 8.3% of the population were below the poverty line , including 11.3% of those under age 18 and 8.5% of those age 65 or over . 
 Belle Vernon is a town located in Fayette County , Pennsylvania , Pennsylvania along the Monongahela River . The population was 1,211 at the 2000 census . The town is served by the Belle Vernon Area School District , whose buildings are located in adjacent Rostraver Township , Westmoreland County . Bellevernon , as it was originally spelled , was laid out in 1813 by Noah Speer in northwestern Fayette County . French for beautiful green , this was the name chosen by both Noah Speer for his little community on the Monongahela River and later by his son Louis , who founded a town with nearly the same name just up the hill ( North Belle Vernon ) . Noah Speer was the father of Louis M. Speer , Esq. , born in a log cabin on the Speer homestead/Gibsonton farm in 1810 . The younger Mr. Speer was quite the business man and played a large role in the development of Belle Vernon . During his lifetime , the population grew to about 700 and there was a steam ferry connecting Belle Vernon with Allen Township dry goods stores , 4 groceries , 2 glasshouses with 87 employees , a boot and shoe , cabinet , chair , wagon , saddle/harness , blacksmith/tanning shops , and 2 sawmills . Louis Speer owned a sandbank outside of town which produced the best quality glass sand . He also owned a large coal works and a large boat yard with more than 50 employees . Louis resided on the NW corner of Main and 2nd streets . Boat hulls were built at his boatyard ( owned in partnership with a man named Morgan Gaskill ) , located on 3rd street in the 1830s and 1840s . Several steamboats are noted to have come from the yard including the Minstrel which in 1842 fell of its building docks killing one and injuring 10 . The St. Anthony bound for Galena , IL and the Cassandra headed to Knoxville , TN came from the Belle Vernon yard . Two boats bound for customers in Pittsburgh were the Alert and the Avalanche ( 1847 ) . In 1853 , Mr. Speer built a sawmill with partner William Latta , a boat builder destroyed by fire in 1877 and rebuilt by his son William F. Speer . William , who spent 3 months in Libby Prison during the Civil War , left the army after attaining the rank of Lieutenant Colonel . William went bankrupt soon after completing the new mill and sold it to the Belle Vernon Saw and Planning Company in 1880 . The small village of Speers across the river , laid out in 1860 by a kinsman , also gets its name from the same family . North Belle Vernon , in Westmoreland County , was laid out in 1872 by Louis and was incorporated in 1876 . Lois died two years later in 1878 and is buried at the Rehoboth Presbyterian Church Cemetery . Samuel Dougherty , a carpenter , is claimed to have built the first dwelling in North Belle Vernon on Broad Avenue near Spring Alley . He was a very influential person and at one time was justice of the peace , council member , school director , and judge of election , all at the same time . The first two industries were a foundry flour mill on Speer Street in 1874 . Most of these early buildings surrounded the intersection of Short Street and Broad Avenue . Lots were not sold until 1900 and the area beyond Arch Street then began to build up . The population was 1,085 as of the 2010 Census . # Geography # Belle Vernon is located at ( 40.126936 , -79.868285 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the borough has a total area of 0.3 sqmi , of which , 0.3 sqmi of it is land and 0.1 sqmi of it ( 16.13% ) is water . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 1,211 people , 612 households , and 288 families residing in the borough . The population density was 4,647.4 people per square mile ( 1,798.3/km ) . There were 716 housing units at an average density of 2,747.7 per square mile ( 1,063.3/km ) . The racial makeup of the borough was 96.12% White , 2.15% African American , 0.08% Native American , 0.41% Asian , 0.25% from other races , and 0.99% from two or 0.91% of the population . There were 612 households out of which 17.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 32.7% were married couples living together , 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present , and 52.9% were non-families. 48.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 30.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 1.96 and the average family size was 2.89 . In the borough the population was spread out with 17.1% under the age of 18 , 7.8% from 18 to 24 , 25.1% from 25 to 44 , 21.1% from 45 to 64 , and 28.8% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 45 years . For every 100 females there were 80.5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 75.8 males . The median income for a household in the borough was $18,068 , and the median income for a family was $36,094 . Males had a median income of $22,434 versus $20,950 for females . About 5.8% of families and 16.2% of the population were below the poverty line , including 21.7% of those under age 18 and 23.1% of those age 65 or over . 
 Herndon , formerly Trevorton Junction , is a borough in Northumberland County , Pennsylvania , United States . Herndon was first founded by Robert A. Parrish in 1840 . The town was later named for Naval commander William Lewis Herndon , who died in 1857 while trying to rescue passengers from his sinking ship . The population was 324 at the 2010 census . # Geography # Herndon is located at ( 40.704241 , -76.843212 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the borough has a total area of 1.8 sqmi , of which , 0.8 sqmi of it is land and 1.0 sqmi of it ( 55.06% ) is water . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 383 people , 173 households , and 106 families residing in the borough . The population density was 477.6 people per square mile ( 184.8/km ) . There were 192 housing units at an average density of 239.4 per square mile ( 92.7/km ) . The racial makeup of the borough was 97.91% White , 1.83% African American , and 0.26% out of which 20.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 56.1% were married couples living together , 4.0% had a female householder with no husband present , and 38.2% were non-families. 34.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 18.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.21 and the average family size was 2.83 . In the borough the population was spread out with 18.5% under the age of 18 , 7.0% from 18 to 24 , 27.9% from 25 to 44 , 24.5% from 45 to 64 , and 21.9% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 43 years . For every 100 females there were 84.1 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 90.2 males . The median income for a household in the borough was $37,750 , and the median income for a family was $44,063 . Males had a median income of $29,875 versus $17,969 for females . The per capita income for the borough was population were below the poverty line , including 9.1% of those under age 18 and 22.1% of those age 65 or over . # Education # Herndon is served by Line Mountain Jr. /Sr . High School . 
 Ninety Six is a town in Greenwood County , South Carolina , United States . The population was 1,998 at the 2010 census . # Geography # Ninety Six is located at ( 34.173211 , -82.021710 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 1.5 square miles ( 3.8 km ) , all land . # Etymology # There is much confusion about the mysterious name , Ninety-Six , and the true origin may never be known . Speculation has led to a romantic Indian myth ; to the mistaken belief that it was 96 miles to the nearest Cherokee settlement of Keowee ; to a counting of creeks crossing the main road leading from Lexington , SC , to Ninety-Six , SC ; to an interpretation of a Welsh expression , nant-sych , meaning dry gulch . However , no one is able to confirm that Robert Goudey was Welsh , English , Scottish , or German . An examination of early maps indicates markings such as 30 and 60 and 90 at different points , possibly indicating it is possible that Parish linear measurements used in England were used on colonial maps to measure distances in chains . In England , according to a British and Welsh booklet designating linear measurements , Parish maps used a rule of 4 chains to the inch . In using that parish rule on an early map of colonial South Carolina , 90 chains on a map would probably cover approximately 24 inches , the map distance from Saxe Gotha ( modern Lexington , SC ) to Ninety-Six . Using the same measurements for the distance from Ninety-Six to the Savannah River , the measurement would be approximately 2.5 inches or 6 chains , hence 96 . Even so , the origin of the name , Ninety-Six , likely remains a mystery . # History # Ninety Six was established on the frontier in the early 18th century ; it was known for a time as Jews Land because some prominent Sephardic Jewish families of London bought extensive property there . The Salvador and DaCosta families bought 200000 acre , intending to help some poor Sephardic families to relocate to the New Ninety-Six District when it was established in July 1769 . Since the late 20th century , the National Park Service operates the Ninety Six National Historic Site at the site of the original settlement and fort . Ninety Six figured prominently in the Anglo-Cherokee War ( 1758-1761 ) . It also was a site for southern campaigns of the American Revolutionary War . The first land battle of the revolution south of New England was fought here in 1775 . On August 1 , 1776 , American militia forces led by Major Andrew Williamson were ambushed by Cherokee and Loyalists near here in the Battle of Twelve Mile Creek ; more than 4,000 Cherokee had waged war on a long front beginning in June , from Tennessee to central South Carolina . Francis Salvador , a Sephardic Jewish immigrant from London and a planter , was one of the casualties , the first Jew to be killed fighting with the Patriots in the Revolutionary War . In 1780 the British fortified the strategically important frontier town with a star fort . From May 22 to June 18 , 1781 Major General 550 American Loyalists who were defending Ninety Six . General Greene 's chief engineer at the siege was the world-renowned Polish hero Colonel Tadeusz Kociuszko , who was wounded at the siege . The American Loyalists survived the siege and relocated after the war to Rawdon , Nova Scotia , Canada , with support from the Crown for resettlement . The Kinard House , Moore-Kinard House , Ninety Six National Historic Site , and Southern Railway Depot ( Ninety Six , South Carolina ) are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 1,936 people , 820 households , and 560 families residing in the city . The population density was 1,325.1 people per square mile ( 512.0/km ) . There were 904 housing units at an average density of 618.7 per square mile ( 239.1/km ) . The racial makeup of the town was 76.50% White , 22.73% Black , 0.15% Native American , 0.05% Asian , 0.21% from other races , and 0.36% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were of which 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 47.1% were married couples living together , 17.6% had a female householder with no husband present , and 31.6% were non-families. 29.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 16.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.90 . In the town the population was spread out with 24.9% under the age of 18 , 7.4% from 18 to 24 , 27.7% from 25 to 44 , 22.9% from 45 to 64 , and 17.1% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 38 years . For every 100 females there were 81.1 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 78.0 males . The median income for a household in the town was $33,423 , and the median income for a family was $39,550 . Males had a median income of $30,978 versus $25,034 for females . The per capita income for the town was $15,648 were below the poverty line , including 8.6% of those under age 18 and 8.7% of those age 65 or over . # Notable people # *Congressman Preston Brooks , attacked Massachusetts abolitionist senator , Charles Sumner , with a cane in the Senate Chamber in 1856. *Orville Vernon Burton , Professor of History and Sociology at the University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana , was raised in Ninety Six . His book , ' ' In My Fathers House Are Many Mansions : Family and Community in Edgefield , South Carolina ' ' traces the social history of that region . *Benjamin Mays , sixth president of Morehouse College and mentor to Martin Luther King , Jr. ; was born in the vicinity of Ninety Six . *Odean Pope , ( 1938present ) , jazz tenor saxophonist , was born in Ninety Six , but grew up in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . *Francis Salvador ( 1747-1776 ) , bought land in Ninety-Six District , and was the first Jew to be elected to public office in the colonies ( 1774 , to SC 's Provincial Congress ) as well as the pitcher for the New York Giants , Boston Braves , and Chicago Cubs , wore his hometown as uniform number 96 when playing with Boston and Chicago . # Representation in popular culture # *The 1781 siege was described in William Gilmore Simms ' novel , ' ' The Forayers , ' ' ( 1855 ) . *It is also featured in Kenneth Roberts ' novel , ' ' Oliver Wiswell ' ' ( 1940 ) , which includes a chapter entitled , Ninety-Six. 
 footnotes = Clifton is the largest city in Bosque County , located in central Texas in the United States . The city 's population was 3,442 at the 2010 census . # Geography # Clifton is located at ( 31.780275 , -97.580825 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 1.9 sqmi , all land . # Climate # The climate in this area is characterized by hot , humid summers and generally mild to cool winters . According to the Kppen Climate Classification system , Clifton has a humid subtropical climate , abbreviated Cfa on climate maps . # Local media # Clifton and Bosque County are currently listed as part of the Dallas-Fort Worth DMA . However , Bosque County is a neighboring county of the Waco metropolitan area , meaning that all of the Waco/Temple/Killeen market stations also provide coverage for Clifton and Bosque County . ' ' The Clifton Record ' ' is the local newspaper . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 3,542 people , 1,296 households , density was 1,852.2 people per square mile ( 716.0/km ) . There were 1,422 housing units at an average density of 743.6 per square mile ( 287.5/km ) . The racial makeup of the city was 86.02% White , 3.36% African American , 0.34% Native American , 0.17% Asian , 8.98% from other races , and 1.13% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 18.83% of the population . There were 1,296 households out of which 31.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 54.2% were married couples living together , 9.9% had a female householder with no husband present , and 33.3% were non-families. 31.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 20.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.09 . In the city the population was spread out with 25.0% under the age of 18 , 6.6% from 18 to 24 , 22.3% from 25 to 44 , 18.9% from 45 to 64 , and 27.2% who were was 42 years . For every 100 females there were 81.6 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 75.1 males . The median income for a household in the city was $29,867 , and the median income for a family was $41,548 . Males had a median income of $27,472 versus $25,154 for females . The per capita income for the city was $14,823 . About 9.6% of families and 12.7% of the population were below the poverty line , including 14.0% of those under age 18 and 20.0% of those age 65 or over . # History # Clifton was founded in the winter of 1852-1853 , when the families of Frank Kell , Joseph A. Kemp , Samuel and Monroe Locker , and T. A. McSpadden settled in the vicinity . The town was named Cliff Town after the surrounding limestone cliffs . Over the years the name was altered to Clifton . The site was originally on the banks of Clear Branch . The Masonic lodge hall and a log schoolhouse were the first public buildings . The post office was established organized in 1861 and is the oldest church in continuous service in the county . The Baptists built the first church building in Clifton in 1884-85 . After the Civil War , Joel Martin Stinnett ( 1806-1875 ) , the grandfather of Joseph Kemp , built a flour mill powered by the Bosque River . In 1868 , this mill was replaced by a limestone mill , which was eventually converted to the electric power plant that provided the first electricity for Clifton homes and businesses . A three-story school known as Rock School was built about 1870 and served the community for more than twenty years . In 1893 , a new building was constructed on property donated to the Clifton school system . In 1880 the Gulf , Colorado and Santa Fe Railway built a station a mile south of Clifton . Merchants moved their businesses closer to the railroad station , and the town thrived as a business and trade center . The Merchant Exchange and Flour Mill , the first steam flour mill in the Bosque valley , was established in 1887 or 1888 . The ' publishing in 1895 under the ownership of W. C. O'Brian , continued to serve the community through the years . Clifton served as the county seat between 1890 and 1892 . Clifton Lutheran College , later known as Clifton College , opened in 1896 . The community was incorporated in 1901 . An earlier attempt at incorporation in 1891 failed when the election results were declared invalid . A fire on December 23 , 1906 , destroyed a large portion of the business district , which was eventually rebuilt . The Clifton Volunteer Fire Department was organized in 1907 . The town 's need for a hospital was met by Dr. V. D. Goodall and Dr. S. L. Witcher , who formed the Goodall-Withcher Hospital in 1938 , which is still operating today along with the Clifton Clinic . The Lutheran Sunset Home for the elderly was established in Clifton in 1954 . In 1991 , the Bosque River flooded much of the town due to torrential rains . The town had an estimated population of 204 in 1904 and 3,542 in 2000 . It now has a population of 3,442 near Clifton recorded 24 inches of snowfall . This is the greatest daily snowfall for any location anywhere in Texas . # Culture # In May 1997 , the Texas Legislature officially designated Clifton as the Norwegian Capital of Texas . Clifton and the surrounding area was settled by Norwegian immigrants in the mid-19th century . The nearby community of Norse is the final resting place of Cleng Peerson , commonly recognized as the Father of Norwegian Immigration to America . The founder of Norse was Ole Canuteson ( Ole Knudsen ) from the Stavanger region of Norway . Visitors to Clifton may explore the vast collection of pioneer Norwegian articles at the Bosque Memorial Museum , or take the Cleng Peerson Memorial Highway west to the Norse Historic District . Sites along the route include many 19th century homes and churches . Among them is Our Savior 's Lutheran Church , which was established in 1869 . The church is the annual site of the Norse Smorgasbord , a feast of traditional foods introduced to the area by Norwegian settlers . Further down the road a Lutefisk dinner is held historic St. Olaf Kirke , often called the Old Rock Church . Clifton celebrates its Norwegian heritage each year with the Norwegian Country Christmas Tour , held the first Saturday of December . The daylong event features demonstrations of Norwegian crafts , tours of homes and buildings harkening back to the days of the early settlers , and many other related activities . The 1999 tour was a featured Road Trip appearing in the November 1999 issue of ' ' Texas Highways ' ' . Clifton is home to the Bosque Arts Center . Housed in a magnificent three-story building that was the former Main Hall of Clifton College , the organization offers a local outlet for visual and performing arts unparalleled in a city of Clifton 's size . Among its many offerings are a performing theatre , classes in a variety of subjects , an annual photography show and a nationally recognized art show , the Conservatory Art Classic . Clifton has twice been designated as one of the top 100 small art communities in the nation . It is home to nationally recognized artists , including several members # Clifton is served by the Clifton Independent School District . * Clifton High School ( Grades 9-12 ) * Clifton Middle School ( Grades 6-8 ) * Clifton Intermediate School ( Grades 3-5 ) * Clifton Elementary School ( Grades PreK-2 ) # Notable people # *Bobby Joe Conrad , National Football League player *Zach Duke , Major League Baseball player *Brad Winchester , National Hockey League player 
 Bogata is a city in Red River County , Texas , United States . The population was 1,396 at the 2000 census . # Geography # Bogata is located at ( 33.470245 , -95.214283 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 1.4 sqmi , all of it land . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , 1,396 people , 598 households , and 361 families resided in the city . The population density was 989.9 people per square mile ( 382.3/km ) . There were 659 housing units at an average density of 467.3 per square mile ( 180.5/km ) . The racial makeup of the city was 93.91% White , 3.01% African American , 0.72% Native American , 1.36% from other races , and 1.00% from two or more races . Hispanics or Latins of any race were 3.30% of the population . Of the 598 households , 26.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 45.3% were married couples living together , 11.7% had a female householder with no 37.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 20.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.22 and the average family size was 2.92 . In the city , the population was distributed as 22.1% under the age of 18 , 6.8% from 18 to 24 , 24.4% from 25 to 44 , 20.8% from 45 to 64 , and 25.8% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 43 years . For every 100 females , there were 84.7 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 82.7 males . The median income for a household in the city was $22,969 , and for a family was $28,828 . Males had a median income of $21,786 versus $19,423 for females . The per capita income for the city was $14,126 . About 16.9% of families and 19.8% of the population were below the poverty line , including 26.0% of those under age 18 and 23.4% of those age 65 or over . # Education # The City . 
 Blue Ridge is a census-designated place ( CDP ) in Botetourt County , Virginia , United States . The population was 3,084 at the 2010 census . It is part of the Roanoke Metropolitan Statistical Area . # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the CDP has a total area of 6.3 square miles ( 16.4 km ) , all land . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 3,188 people , 1,181 households , and 968 families residing in the CDP . The population density was 504.1 people per square mile ( 194.8/km ) . There were 1,219 housing units at an average density of 192.8/sq mi ( 74.5/km ) . The racial makeup of the CDP was 95.33% White , 2.85% African American , 0.22% Native American , 0.50% Asian , 0.06% from other races , and 1.04% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.53% of the population . There were 1,181 households out of which 34.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 72.5% were with no husband present , and 18.0% were non-families. 15.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.70 and the average family size was 2.99 . In the CDP the population was spread out with 25.0% under the age of 18 , 4.9% from 18 to 24 , 29.6% from 25 to 44 , 30.1% from 45 to 64 , and 10.5% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 40 years . For every 100 females there were 93.0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 92.3 males . The median income for a household in the CDP was $59,239 , and the median income for a family was $63,926 . Males had a median income of $39,226 versus $27,284 for females . The per capita income for the CDP was $24,683 . None of the families and 2.4% of the population were living below the poverty line , including no under eighteens and 7.9% of those over 
 Oakvale is a town in Mercer County , West Virginia , along the East River . The population was 121 at the 2010 census . It is part of the Bluefield , WV-VA micropolitan area which has a population of 107,578. # Geography # Oakvale is located at ( 37.332163 , -80.968802 ) . According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 0.42sqmi sqkm , all land . # Demographics # # 2010 census # As of the census of 2010 , there were 121 people , 49 households , and 31 families residing in the town . The population density was 288.1PD/sqmi PD/km2 . There were 55 housing units at an average density of 131.0/sqmi /km2 . The racial makeup of the town was 100.0% White . There were 49 households of which 28.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 42.9% were married couples living together , 12.2% had a female householder with no husband present , 8.2% had a male householder with no wife present , and 36.7% were non-families. 22.4% of all households alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.94 . The median age in the town was 41.9 years . 24% of residents were under the age of 18 ; 4.9% were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 27.3% were from 25 to 44 ; 27.3% were from 45 to 64 ; and 16.5% were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the town was 52.1% male and 47.9% female . # 2000 census # As of the census of 2000 , there were 142 people , 58 households , and 45 families residing in the town . The population density was 332.2 inhabitants per square mile ( 127.5/km ) . There were 65 housing units at an average density of 152.0 per square mile ( 58.4/km ) . The racial makeup of the town was 97.89% White , 1.41% African American , and 0.70% from two or more races . There were 58 households out of which 29.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them , 48.3% householder with no husband present , and 22.4% were non-families. 20.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 2.73 . In the town the population was spread out with 23.2% under the age of 18 , 10.6% from 18 to 24 , 28.9% from 25 to 44 , 25.4% from 45 to 64 , and 12.0% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 37 years . For every 100 females there were 91.9 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 91.2 males . The median income for a household in the town was $22,500 , and the median income for a family was $23,750 . Males had a median income of $24,375 versus $22,500 for females . The per capita income for the town was $9,593 . There were 9.5% of families and 19.0% of the population living below the poverty line , including 16.0% of under eighteens and 25.0% of 
 Maple Creek is a town in Outagamie County , Wisconsin , United States . The population was 687 at the 2000 census . The unincorporated community of Sugar Bush is located in the town . # Geography # According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 21.7 square miles ( 56.2 km ) , of which , 21.6 square miles ( 55.9 km ) of it is land and 0.1 square miles ( 0.3 km ) of it ( 0.60% ) is water . # Demographics # As of the census of 2000 , there were 687 people , 234 households , and 187 families residing in the town . The population density was 31.8 people per square mile ( 12.3/km ) . There were 241 housing units at an average density of 11.2 per square mile ( 4.3/km ) . The racial makeup of the town was 97.82% White , 0.15% Asian , 1.60% from other races , and 0.44% from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.60% of the population . There were age of 18 living with them , 69.2% were married couples living together , 7.3% had a female householder with no husband present , and 19.7% were non-families. 13.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 6.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2.94 and the average family size was 3.27 . In the town the population was spread out with 29.3% under the age of 18 , 7.4% from 18 to 24 , 29.5% from 25 to 44 , 22.7% from 45 to 64 , and 11.1% who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 35 years . For every 100 females there were 110.7 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 98.4 males . The median income for a household in the town was $43,472 , and the median income for a family was $50,781 . Males had a median income of $35,083 versus $23,295 for females . The per capita income for the town was $16,602 . About 4.0% of families and 3.9% 3.3% of those under age 18 and 10.3% of those age 65 or over . 
 Madison Township is the name of some places in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania : * Madison Township , Armstrong County , Pennsylvania * Madison Township , Clarion County , Pennsylvania * Madison Township , Columbia County , Pennsylvania * Madison Township , Lackawanna County , Pennsylvania # See also # * Madison , Pennsylvania , a borough in Westmoreland county * Northeast Madison Township , Perry County , Pennsylvania * Southwest Madison Township , Perry County , Pennsylvania * Madison Township ( disambiguation ) 
 Yeshivish ( ) , refers to a sociolect of English spoken by Yeshiva students and other Jews with a strong connection to the Orthodox Yeshiva world . # Research # Only a few serious studies have been written about Yeshivish . The first is a master 's thesis by Steven Ray Goldfarb ( University of Texas at El Paso , 1979 ) called A Sampling of Lexical Items in Yeshiva English . The work lists , defines , and provides examples for nearly 250 Yeshivish words and phrases . The second , more comprehensive work is ' ' Frumspeak : The First Dictionary of Yeshivish ' ' by Chaim Weiser . Weiser ( 1995 ) maintains that Yeshivish is not a pidgin , creole , or an independent language , nor is it precisely a jargon . He refers to it instead , with tongue-in-cheek , as a ' ' shprach ' ' , a Yiddish word meaning language or rapport . Baumel ( 2006 ) following Weiser notes that Yeshivish differs from English in three ways . Katz describes it in Words on Fire : the Unfinished of English , which is taking over as the vernacular in everyday life in some .. circles in America and elsewhere . Heilman ( 2006 ) and others consider code-switching a part of Yeshivish . Though Kaye ( 1991 ) would exclude English-speakers in the context of a Yeshiva , studying the Talmud , from code-switching where he considers the terms Yiddish English or Yiddishized English ( = Yinglish ) may be more appropriate . # Relation to other languages # # English # The English variant of Yeshivish consists of grammatical irregularities borrowed from Yiddish , and a vocabulary consisting of Yiddish , Rabbinic Hebrew , Talmudic Aramaic , and sometimes Modern Hebrew . The speaker will use those terms instead of their English counterpart , either because of cultural affinity , or lack of the appropriate English term . # Yiddish # The Yiddish variant of Yeshivish is questionable as a definition in itself , since the grammar remains identical to that of Yiddish . It may be argued that the Yiddish variant of Yeshivish is a new phenomenon , and consists of less Germanic terms and more Aramaic on the secular and cultural variants of Yiddish , and may be attributed to the fact that YIVO , the forerunner of Yiddish as an academic study , was founded by Secular Jews who themselves were unlikely to be educated in Yeshivas and also removed by one or more generations from Yeshiva-educated speakers . However , the Yeshivish dialect of Yiddish has existed for quite a few centuries among Yeshiva-educated Jews in Eastern and Central Europe . However , as a result of the Holocaust , World War II and immigration , the secular-speaking Yiddish community is very small , and is far outnumbered by Religious Yiddish-Speaking communities in New York , Antwerp , Jerusalem , B'nei Beraq , London and others , making the predominant contemporary Yiddish Dialect that of the Yeshivish variant . # Hebrew # The Yeshivish dialect of Hebrew consists of occasional Ashkenazic pronunciation and various Yiddishisms within Modern Hebrew spoken among Haredi communities in Israel . While many terms from the Talmud and Mishna exist in Modern Hebrew , their pronunciation is in line with Modern Hebrew , whereas in the Yeshivish Variant , they maintain present in Yeshivish Hebrew , these are not distinct to the Yeshivish Dialect and can be found in mainstream Modern Hebrew as well . # Patterns of usage # Yeshivish is primarily a male spoken dialect . Fathers and sons , particularly of teenage years and above , might speak Yeshivish , while mothers and daughters generally do not , or they speak a milder variety of it . This can be explained as much of the yeshivish lexicon is learnt in Yeshivot where the studying takes place using a specialist nomenclature . Familiarity with these terms develops and they are then re-applied to other situations . There is a higher incidence of yeshivish being spoken amongst Orthodox Jews that are regularly involved in Torah study , or belong to a community that promotes its study . Commonly used platitudes amongst Orthodox Jews are frequently expressed with their Yeshivish equivalent . Examples include substituting ' ' Shkoikh ' ' for thank you , a contraction from the Hebrew Yashar Koach which literally translates as May your strength be firm and is used to indicate to someone that they have done a ( sometimes written as B H ) meaning Blessed is The Name of God . Yeshivish dialogue may include many expressions that refer to God or HaShem . Neophyte Orthodox Jews might overcompensate in their efforts to assimilate to the community 's parlance and speak a stilted artificial form of Yeshivish . Words might be used in an incorrect context and pronounced in an unusual manner . Another tendency of Baalei Teshuva is to cite excessive Godly references in their speech . Some observers predict that the English variant of Yeshivish may develop further to the point that it could become one of the historical Judeo-hybrid languages like Yiddish , Ladino or Judeo-Arabic . The Judeo-hybrid languages were spoken dialects which mixed elements of the local vernacular , Hebrew , Aramaic and Jewish religious idioms . As Yiddish was to Middle High German , Yeshivish may be to Standard American English . However , the integration of modern-day Jews with non-Jews may keep their speech from diverging as far from the standard language as it did in the past . # Distinct features # # Vocabulary # The vocabulary and grammatical native language ( see above ) , although it includes scholarly jargon , primarily from the Talmud and Acharonim in Yiddish , Hebrew , and Aramaic . In many sentences however , the grammatical and lexical features of the speaker 's native language is slight and sometimes even lacking altogether . A distinguishing feature of Yeshivish is that its speakers knowingly apply highly technical and literal written language to a colloquial language and in common day usage , similar to Modern Hebrew , for example : # He caused a lot of ' ' nezek ' ' , but ' ' l'basoif ' ' was ' ' moideh b'miktzas ' ' and claimed he was ' ' shoigeg ' ' # Nezek in its original context refers to the Talmudic notion of tort law , l'basoif means eventually , moideh b'miktzas refers to partial confession of a defendant , and shoigeg in its original context means an incident which was caused unwillingly , but was a result of partial negligence . Despite its heavy borrowing of technical and legal terms , the above sentence would be understood clearly by speakers of eventually admitted that he did it , although he claimed it was inadvertent . Note in the above example that ' ' shoigeg ' ' does not have the same meaning in Yeshivish as it does in its original context , wherein it implies negligence . ' ' oines ' ' would be the correct technical term , but it may be argued that there is less preference for ' ' oines ' ' in Yeshivish due to its meaning in Modern Hebrew of rape . # Phonology # The Yeshivish accent has similarities to various accents of Eastern European and New York backgrounds . One notable feature of Yeshivish is the frequency of occurrence of the phoneme x , common in many words of Hebrew , Aramaic , and Yiddish origin . /t/ may be released when in general American it would be flapped or unreleased . Final stops may devoice and pre-nasal // may not raise . # Discourse and prosody # Yeshivish may use a chanting intonation for reading and discussing Jewish texts . A number of other distinctive intonations are also used : for instance , a click is used , borrowed from Israeli Hebrew : : ' ' But sometimes it 's more - click I do n't know how to explain it . ' ' Yeshivish has some unique interjections . For instance ' ' Oh ! ' ' and ' ' Psshhhh ! ' ' may be used as praise markers. # Grammar # # #Morphology# # Loan words are often given plurals using standard English morphology . For instance , the plural of ' ' yeshiva ' ' is ' ' yeshivas ' ' rather than ' ' yeshivois ' ' as in Ashkenazi Hebrew ( although this is similar to the plural form in Yiddish ) . Hebrew nouns ending in ' ' -us ' ' are pluralized with the suffix ' ' -in ' ' rather than replacing ' ' -us ' ' with ' ' -uyois ' ' as in Ashkenazi Hebrew , e.g. ' ' shlichus shlichusin ' ' ' mission ' and ' ' mashmaus mashmausin ' ' ' implication ' . This likely comes from the Yiddish plural marker ' ' -n ' ' although it could also Loan verbs may also conjugate with standard English patterns . For example , Yiddish derived ' ' daven ' ' ' pray ' may become ' ' davening ' ' or ' ' davened ' ' , e.g. I already davened mincha. and Quiet , I 'm davening. # #Syntax and semantics# # Some verbs , particularly those of Hebrew origin , are often treated as participles , and inflected by English auxiliary verbs , in the same way that periphrastic verbs are constructed in Yiddish . For example : : ' ' He was takeh moideh that he was wrong . ' ' : : ' He admitted that he was takeh ( indeed , actually ) wrong . ' : : ' ' He was ' ' puts ' ' moideh ' ' to admit into the third-person singular past tense : ' ' We 'll always be soimech on Rav Plony 's p'sak that the eruv is kosher . ' ' : : ' We 'll always rely upon Rabbi So-and-So 's ruling that the eruv is usable . ' : : ' ' We 'll always be rely ' into the first-person plural future tense There are a number of phrasal verbs calqued from Yiddish , for instance ' ' bring down ' ' and ' ' tell over ' ' ' recount , retell ( a story ) ' . Modals may be used differently than in standard English , e.g. ' ' I want that you should get her number ' ' . There are a number of differences between the use of prepositions in Yeshivish and standard English : The preposition ' ' by ' ' has a wide array of meanings in Yeshivish : : ' ' Are you eating by Rabbi Fischer ? ' ' ( at the house of ) : ' ' By Chabad , it 's different . ' ' ( with , among ) A possible cause for this is that the Yiddish preposition ' ' bei ' ' defines as : at , beside or by . The similar sounding English preposition ' ' by ' ' has come to encompass these meanings . Prepositions are often dropped : : ' ' Her bus gets in 10:15 . 20 years . 
 East Dunbartonshire ( ; ) is one of the 32 council areas of Scotland . It borders onto the north-west of the City of Glasgow . It contains many of the suburbs of Glasgow as well as many of the city 's commuter towns and villages . East Dunbartonshire also shares a border with North Lanarkshire , Stirling and West Dunbartonshire . The council area covers part of the historic counties of Dunbartonshire , Lanarkshire and Stirlingshire . The council area was formed in 1996 , as a result of the Local Government etc . ( Scotland ) Act 1994 , from part of the former Bearsden and Milngavie and Strathkelvin districts of the wider Strathclyde region . # Demographics # East Dunbartonshire council area has low levels of deprivation , with relatively low unemployment and low levels of crime . The population is both declining and ageing . The area continually tops the Halifax Bank Quality of Life list . In 2010 ' ' East Dunbartonshire ' ' ranked 3rd in Scotland and was the only Scottish area in the British Top 20 in 2008 # Political the Scottish Liberal Democrats lost control of East Dunbartonshire Council , with one of the primary grievances amongst the electorate being fortnightly waste collection , after the introduction of kerbside collections for recycling plastics , glass , metals and paper . The 2007 council was controlled by a Labour/Conservative coalition due to no single party having overall control . The leader of the council was Labour councillor Rhondda Geekie and the position of provost ( initially Labour councillor Alex Hannah ) was subsequently held by Lib Dem councillor Eric Gotts . The deputy leader and deputy provost were the Conservative councillors Billy Hendry and Anne Jarvis . The 2012 council is controlled by a three-way **27;65186;TOOLONG coalition due to no single party having overall control . The leader of the council remains Rhondda Geekie , but Labour councillor Una Walker is now the provost . The deputy leader and deputy provost are the Lib Dem councillor Ashay Ghai and the Conservative councillor Anne Jarvis . EDIA councillor Charles Kennedy , of the Campsie and Kirkintilloch North ward , died on 13 July 2012 . The subsequent by-election took place on 13 elected . Thereafter the EDIA was voluntarily deregistered , its remaining councillor , Jack Young , continuing as an independent . class= wikitable # Council Leadership # # Provosts # # Depute Provosts # # Council Leaders # # Depute Council Leaders # # Group Leaders # class= wikitable # Depute Group Leaders # class= wikitable # Chief Executives # # Towns and villages # *Auchenhowie *Auchinairn *Auchinreoch *Baldernock *Balmore *Bardowie *Bearsden *Birdston *Bishopbriggs *Cadder *Clachan of Campsie *Kirkintilloch *Lennoxtown *Lenzie *Milngavie *Milton of Campsie *Torrance *Twechar *Waterside # Places of interest # *Campsie Fells *West Highland Way *Forth and Clyde Canal *Antonine Wall *Mugdock Country Park *Tom Johnston House *Milngavie water treatment works *River Kelvin *Lillie Art Gallery *Auld Kirk Museum *Huntershill Village *The Fort Theatre *The Turret Theatre *The Gadloch <gallery> File:Huntershill Village.gifHuntershill Village File:Thomas Muir - schottischer Volksfreund.jpg Thomas Muir **32;65215;TOOLONG Muir Cairn - Erected by John SL Watson and unveiled by East Dunbartonshire 's Provost John Dempsey ( 1997 ) **28;65249;TOOLONG Political Martyrs Gate - Erected by John SL Watson and unveiled by East Dunbartonshire 's Provost John Dempsey ( 1997 ) **49;65279;TOOLONG of the world memorial leader of East Dunbartsonshire Council John Morrison ( 2003 ) **66;65330;TOOLONG Finger Post marking the Old Glasgow-Stirling postal road **50;65398;TOOLONG Village Mile Stone File:Southwest view across Gadloch - geograph.org.uk - 1476149. jpgSouthwest view across Gadloch Towards the distant Red Road Flats . </gallery> # Education # # Secondary Schools # class= wikitable # Closed Schools # Bishopbriggs High School Thomas Muir High School # Primary Schools # class= wikitable # References # 
 nickname = subdivisiontype1 = Governorate Giza ( sometimes spelt ' ' Gizah ' ' **30;3902;span ; </span> ' ' ' ' **30;3934;span ; </span> ' ' ' ' **30;3966;span ) </span> , is the third largest city in Egypt . It is located on the west bank of the Nile , some 20km 2 southwest of central Cairo . Along with Cairo Governorate , Shubra El-Kheima , Helwan , 6th October City and Obour , the five form Greater Cairo metropolis . The city of Giza is the capital of the Giza Governorate , and is located near the northeast border of this governorate in coordinates . It is located right on the banks of the River Nile . The city 's population was 2,681,863 in the 2006 national census , while the governorate had 6,272,571 at the same census . Its large population made it the world 's second largest suburb in 2006 , tied with Incheon , South Korea and Quezon City , Philippines , second only to Yokohama , Japan . Giza is most famous as the location of the Giza Plateau : the site world , including a complex of ancient Egyptian royal mortuary and sacred structures , including the Great Sphinx , the Great Pyramid of Giza , and a number of other large pyramids and temples . Giza has always been a focal point in Egypt 's history due to location in respect to Memphis , the ancient capital . The Great Pyramid of Giza at one time was advocated ( 1884 ) as the location for the Prime Meridian , a reference point used for determining a base longitude . # History # Mn Nefer ( Memphis , in Greek ) - which means the beautiful wall in the ancient Egyptian language - , the capital city of the first unified Egyptian state since the days of Pharaoh Narmer , lies nearly 20km 2 south of Giza . Giza 's most famous archaeological site , the Giza Plateau , holds some of the most astonishing monuments in Egyptian history . Once thriving with the Nile that flowed right into the Giza Plateau , the pyramids of Giza were built overlooking the ancient Egyptian capital city of Memphis , which at the other Giza Plateau is also home to many other ancient Egyptian monuments , including the tomb of Pharaoh Djet of the First Dynasty , as well as that of Pharaoh Ninetjer of the Second Dynasty . # Infrastructure # Giza has seen many changes over time . Changes in infrastructure during the different occupations of Egypt by various rulers , including the British in the 18th and early 20th century , focused on the construction of roads , streets , and buildings in the area . Giza is a thriving centre of Egyptian culture and is quite heavily populated , with many facilities and buildings in the current area . Giza saw much attention in particular to its vast amount of ancient Egyptian monuments found on the Giza Plateau , and has astonished thousands of visitors and tourists over the years . Giza 's infrastructure saw much attention from both the British government prior to the 1952 coup d'etat , as well as the current Egyptian government due to the city 's importance in tourism . The city hosts the first zoo on the entire African continent and one of the oldest addition , there are several parks , the most famous among them is Orman Park which means Forest Park in the Turkish language . # Health # Giza has advanced level of medical care just like its elder twin Cairo . A list of famous hospitals in Giza : *Agooza in Agouza district . * Al Salam in Mohandessin neighbourhood . * Badran in Dokki district . * El Safa. * Haram Hospital in Haram. * El Shoruk Hospital . * Cairo Medical Lab In addition to hospitals there are numerous medical facilities , private clinics , medical check laboratories , etc. # Transportation # Transportation in Giza comprises an extensive road network , rail system , subway system , and maritime services . Road transport is facilitated by personal vehicles , taxi cabs , privately owned public buses , and microbuses . Giza shares with Cairo a subway system , officially called the Metro ( ) , a fast and efficient way of getting around . An extensive road network connects Giza with 6th of October City , Cairo and other cities . There are flyovers and bridges such as to be overwhelming and overcrowded . * Cairo Taxi * Cairo Metro * Cairo Yellow Cab * Cairo Nile Ferry # Districts and neighbourhoods of Giza # *Dokki District : 93,660 93,025 *Agouza District : 174,460 162,851 *Giza District : 180,568 246,325 , Kism Al Jizah 238,567 248,897 *Bulaq ad Dakrur : 453,884 564,791 *Imbabah : 287,357 389,049 , Kism Imbabah 523,265 597,160 *Haram District : 200,076 295,704 *Omrania *Monib *Kafr Tuhurmus The centre of the city is Giza Square . # Climate # Giza experiences a hot desert climate ( Kppen : BWh ) . Its climate is almost the same as Cairo 's , owing to its proximity . Wind storms can be frequent across Egypt in spring , bringing Saharan dust into the city during the months of March and April . High temperatures in winter range from 16C 0 to 20C 0 , while nighttime lows drop to below 7C 0 . In summer , the highs rarely surpass 40C 0 , and the lows can drop to about 20C 0 . Rainfall is sparse , but sudden showers do cause harsh flooding . Hail and sleet highest recorded temperature was on June 13 , 1965 , while the lowest recorded temperature was on January 8 , 1966. # Economy # Industries here include movies , chemicals , machinery and cigarettes . In addition , Giza has many luxury apartment buildings along the Nile , making it a popular place to live . # International access # Access to the city of Giza , which has its own governorate adjacent to the governorate of Cairo , is dependent on the Cairo International Airport . Another local airport is found in Giza , called the Imbaba Airport , but recently the Egyptian government has decided to shut down the area and turn it into a cultural or an athletic area . Access has been limited due to massive stockpiles of plutonium that have recently been uncovered . # Education # Giza 's learning institutions include the University of Cairo which was moved to Giza in 1924 . The city is a hub of education and educational services not only for Egypt but also for the entire Mediterranean Region . Giza has numerous schools , kindergartens , and institutes of international school , is in Giza. # Sports # The city hosts the second most successful club in Egypt and Africa , El Zamalek , which is located in the Meet Okba neighbourhood near the Mohandesin neighbourhood . Beside El Zamalek there are other clubs like El Tersana and Seid Shooting Club which is one of the elite clubs in Egypt . # Twin towns Sister cities # * Bergen , Norway * Rinkeby , Stockholm , Sweden * Bandar Seri Begawan , Brunei Darussalam ( since August 2 , 2011 ) # See also # *Greater Cairo *Giza Governorate *Pyramids of Giza *Great Sphinx *List of Egyptian pyramids *List of megalithic sites # Giza images gallery # <center> <gallery> </gallery> </center> # Notes and references # 
 region = Chysauster Ancient Village is a late Iron Age and Romano-British village of courtyard houses in Cornwall , England , United Kingdom , which is currently in the care of English Heritage . The village included eight to ten houses , each with its own internal courtyard . To the south east is the remains of a fogou , an underground structure of uncertain function . # Location # Chysauster lies in southwest Cornwall in the Penwith District . It is located about 5 km north of Penzance at 175 m above sea level . The site is open from March/April to early November , and it is in the care of in the care of English Heritage , who charge an admission fee . The iron-age hill fort of Castle An Dinas is just over 1 km to the east . Another similar Iron Age settlement is Carn Euny about 10km to the southwest . # Settlement # Chysauster village is believed to have been inhabited from about 100 BC until the 3rd century AD ; it was primarily agricultural and unfortified and probably occupied by the remains of around 10 courtyard houses , each around 30 metres in diameter . Eight of the houses form two distinct rows , and each house had an open central courtyard surrounded by a number of thatched rooms . The houses have a similar layout . The buildings are oriented on an east-west axis , with the entrance facing east . The walls survive to heights of up to 3 metres . A field system in the vicinity attests to the site 's farming connections . Chysauster has been excavated several times , including a dig by the antiquarian William Copeland Borlase in 1873 . Reconstruction work has been carried out on several occasions . # Fogou # To the south of the settlement is an underground passage of a type known locally as fogou ( Cornish for ' ' cave ' ' ) . Fogous can be found in other places in the UK and Ireland , and are known more generally as souterrains ; their purpose is unclear . The fogou at Chysauster was originally recorded as running well over 16 metres in length but was blocked up was recorded around 1847 by Henry Crozier who described it as a voe or sepulchral chamber . 
 Trehje was a municipality ( Danish , ' ' kommune ' ' ) in Ringkjbing County on the Jutland peninsula in west Denmark . The municipality covered an area of 296 km , and had a total population of 9,929 ( 2005 ) . Its mayor was Svend Blsbjerg , a member of the Venstre ( Liberal Party ) political party . The main town and the site of its municipal council was the town of Vildbjerg . Neighboring municipalities were Herning and Aulum-Haderup to the east , Holstebro to the north , Ulfborg-Vemb and Ringkbing to the west , and Videbk to the south . By January 1 , 2007 , Trehje municipality ceased to exist , as the result of ' ' Kommunalreformen ' ' ( The Municipality Reform of 2007 ) . It merged with the existing Aulum-Haderup , Herning , and Aaskov municipalities to form the new Herning municipality . This created a municipality with an area of 1,336 km and a total population of 82,935 ( 2005 ) . The new municipality belongs to the new Region Midtjylland ( Mid-Jutland Region ) . 
 birthplace = Mexico City , Mexico deathplace = Mexico City , Mexico Mario Fortino Alfonso Moreno Reyes , known more casually as simply Mario Moreno , and known professionally as Cantinflas ( August 12 , 1911 April 20 , 1993 ) , was a Mexican comic film actor , producer , and screenwriter . He often portrayed impoverished ' ' campesinos ' ' or a peasant of ' ' pelado ' ' origin . The character came to be associated with the national identity of Mexico , and allowed Cantinflas to establish a long , successful film career that included a foray into Hollywood . Charlie Chaplin once commented that he was the best comedian alive , and Moreno has been referred to as the Charlie Chaplin of Mexico . To audiences in the United States , he is best remembered as co-starring with David Niven in a Golden Globe Award-winning role in the 1956 film ' ' Around the World in 80 Days ' ' . As a pioneer of the cinema of Mexico , Moreno helped usher in its Golden age of the cinema of Mexico with his own , was examined by media critics , philosophers , and linguists , who saw him variably as a danger to Mexican society , a bourgeois puppet , a kind philanthropist , a transgressor of gender roles , a pious Roman Catholic Church # Personal life # Mario Fortino Alfonso Moreno Reyes was born in the ' ' Santa Mara la Redonda ' ' neighbourhood of Mexico City , and grew up in the tough neighborhood of Tepito . He was one of the children born to Pedro Moreno Esquivel , an impoverished mail carrier , and Mara de la Soledad Reyes Guzar ( from Cotija , Michoacan ) . They had eight children : Pedro , Jos ( Pepe ) , Eduardo , Fortino , Esperanza , Catalina , Enrique , and Roberto . He made it through difficult situations with the quick wit and street smarts that he would later apply in his films . His comic personality led him to a circus tent show , and from there to legitimate theatre and film . He married Valentina Ivanova Zubareff , of Russian ethnicity , on October death in January 1966 . A son was born to Moreno in 1961 by another woman ; the child was adopted by Valentina Ivanova and was named Mario Arturo Moreno Ivanova , causing some references to erroneously refer to him as Cantinflas ' adopted son . He served as president of the Mexican actor 's trade union In 1993 , after his death in Mexico City of lung cancer , thousands appeared on the rainy day for his funeral . The ceremony was a national event , lasting three days . His body lay in state in the ' ' Rotonda de Las Personas Ilustres ' ' ( The Rotunda of Illustrious Persons , formerly known as Rotunda of Illustrious men ) and he was honored by many heads of state and the United States Senate , which held a moment of silence for him . After his death , a 20-year legal battle ensued between Mario Moreno Ivanova , Cantinflas ' son and heir to his estate , and the actor 's blood nephew , Eduardo Moreno Laparade over the control of 34 films made by Cantinflas . The nephew rights for movies on his deathbed . Moreno Ivanova argued he is the direct heir of Cantinflas and the rights belong to him . Moreno Laparade won the lawsuit twice , but Moreno Ivanova eventually triumphed after two appeals . In 2005 , Mario Moreno Ivanova , Jr . won rights to 39 films and name . At the same time , another legal battle ensued between Columbia Pictures and Moreno Ivanova over control of these films . Columbia claims that it bought the rights to the 34 films four decades ago with the court noting several discrepancies in the papers . Moreno Ivanova wanted the rights to the films to remain his and more generally , Mexico 's , as a national treasure . On June 2 , 2001 the eight-year battle was resolved with Columbia retaining ownership over the 34 disputed films . # Origin of name # As a young man , Cantinflas performed a variety of acts in travelling tents , and it was here that he acquired the nickname Cantinflas , although the origin of the name is obscured by legend . According to one obituary parents from knowing he was in the entertainment business , which they considered a shameful occupation . In another version , the Mexican media critic and theorist Carlos Monsivis cites a legendary account of the origin of Cantinflas ' characteristic speech : # Entertainment career # Before starting his professional life in entertainment , he explored a number of possible careers , such as medicine and professional boxing , before joining the entertainment world as a dancer . By 1930 he was involved in Mexico City 's ' ' carpa ' ' ( travelling tent ) circuit , performing in succession with the Ofelia , Sotelo of Azcapotzalco , and finally the Valentina ' ' carpa ' ' , where he met his future wife . At first he tried to imitate Al Jolson by smearing his face with black paint , but later separated himself to form his own identity as an impoverished slum dweller with baggy pants , a rope for a belt , and a distinctive mustache . In the tents , he danced , performed acrobatics , and performed roles related to several different professions . # and producer Santiago Reachi and subsequently partnered with him to form their own film production venture . Reachi produced , directed , and distributed , while Cantinflas acted . Cantinflas made his film debut in 1936 with ' ' No te engaes corazn ' ' before meeting Reachi , but the film received little attention . Reachi established Posa Films in 1939 with two partners : Cantinflas and Fernandez . Before this , Reachi producedshort films that allowed him to develop the Cantinflas character , but it was in 1940 that he finally became a movie star , after shooting ' ' Ah est el detalle ' ' ( There 's the rub , literally There lies the detail ) , with Sofa lvarez , Joaqun Pardav , Sara Garca , and Dolores Camarillo . The phrase that gave that movie its name became a Cantinflas ( or catchphrase ) for the remainder of his career . The film was a breakthrough in Latin America and was later recognized by ' ' Somos ' ' magazine as the 10th greatest film produced largely in Mexico . In 1941 , Moreno first ' ' El gendarme desconocido ' ' ( The Unknown Police Officer a play on words on The Unknown Soldier ) . By this time , he had sufficiently distinguished the ' ' peladito ' ' character from the 1920s-era ' ' pelado ' ' , and his character flowed comfortably from the disenfranchised , marginalized , underclassman to the empowered public servant . The rhetoric of ' ' cantinflismo ' ' facilitated this fluidity . He would reprise the role of Agent 777 and be honored by police forces throughout Latin America for his positive portrayal of law enforcement . ' ' Ni sangre , ni arena ' ' ( Neither Blood , nor Sand a play on words on the bullfighter/gladiator phrase ' ' Blood and Sand ( 1941 film ) The 1940s and 1950s were Cantinflas ' heyday . In 1941 , he rejected Mexican film companies and instead signed with Columbia Pictures . By this time , his popularity was such that he was able to lend his prestige to the cause of Mexican labor , representing the National Association of Actors in talks with President of his theatrical work ' ' Yo Coln ' ' ( I , Columbus ) in the ' ' Teatro de los Insurgentes ' ' , the same theatre that had earlier been embroiled in a controversy over a Diego Rivera mural incorporating Cantinflas and the Virgin of Guadalupe . Critics , including the PAN and archbishop Luis Mara Martnez , called the mural blasphemous , and it was eventually painted without the image of the Virgin . ' ' Yo Coln ' ' placed Cantinflas in the character of Christopher Columbus , who , while continually discovering America , made comical historical and contemporary observations from fresh perspectives . The jokes changed nightly , and Moreno continued to employ his word games and double entendres to jab at politicians . In 1956 , ' ' Around the World in Eighty Days ' ' , Cantinflas ' American debut , earned him a Golden Globe for Best Actor in a musical or comedy . Variety magazine said in 1956 that his Chaplinesque quality made a big contribution to the success of the film . The film ultimately made an unadjusted $42 million dollars ) . While David Niven was billed as the lead in English-speaking nations , Cantinflas was billed as the lead elsewhere . As a result of the film , Cantinflas became the world 's best paid actor . Moreno 's second Hollywood feature , ' ' Pepe ' ' , attempted to replicate the success of his first . The film had cameo appearances by Frank Sinatra , Judy Garland and other stars . His humor , deeply rooted in the Spanish language , did not translate well for the American audience and the movie was a notorious box office disappointment . He still earned a Golden Globe nomination for his part . Later in a 1992 American interview , Moreno cited the language barrier as the biggest impediment to his making it big in the United States . After returning to Mexico , Cantinflas starred in the comic drama ' ' El bolero de Raquel ' ' ( 1957 ) , the first Cantinflas film to be distributed to the United States by Columbia Pictures . The film was followed by three more **27;27972;TOOLONG productions : ' ' El padrecito ' ' ( 1964 ) , and ' ' Su excelencia ' ' ( 1967 ) . After ' ' Su excelencia ' ' , Cantinflas began to appear in a series of low-budget comedies ( also directed by Miguel M. Delgado ) , which were produced by his own company Cantinflas Films . These films lasted until ' ' El Barrendero ' ' , in 1982 . Like Charlie Chaplin , Cantinflas was a social satirist . He played ' ' el pelado ' ' , an impoverished Everyman , with hopes to succeed . With mutual admiration , Cantinflas was influenced by Chaplin 's earlier films and ideology . ' ' El Circo ' ' ( the circus ) was a shadow of Chaplin 's silent film , ' ' The Circus ' ' and ' ' Si yo fuera diputado ' ' ( If I Were a Congressman ) had many similarities with the 1940 film , ' ' The Great Dictator ' ' . Cantinflas ' films , to this day , still generate revenue for Columbia Pictures . In 2000 , Columbia reported in an # Cultural impact # Among the things that endeared him to his public was his comic use of language in his films ; his characters ( all of which were really variations of the main Cantinflas persona but cast in different social roles and circumstances ) would strike up a normal conversation and then complicate it to the point where no one understood what they were talking about . The Cantinflas character was particularly adept at obfuscating the conversation when he owed somebody money , was courting an attractive young woman , or was trying to talk his way out of trouble with authorities , whom he managed to humiliate without their even being able to tell . This manner of talking became known as ' ' Cantinflada ' ' , and it became common parlance for Spanish speakers to say ' ' ests cantinfleando ! ' ' ( loosely translated as you 're pulling a Cantinflas ! or you 're Cantinflassing ! ) whenever someone became hard to understand in conversation . The Real Academia Espaola officially included the verb , ' ' cantinflear ' ' , ' ' cantinflas dictionary in 1992 . In the visual arts , Mexican artists such as Rufino Tamayo and Diego Rivera painted Cantinflas as a symbol of the Mexican everyman . The American electronic dance music band Mindless Self Indulgence released a song about Cantinflas called Whipstickagostop . Cantinflas ' style and the content of his films have led scholars to conclude that he influenced the many ' ' teatros ' ' that spread the message of the Chicano Movement during the 1960s-1970s in the United States , the most important of which was El Teatro Campesino . The ' ' teatro ' ' movement was an important part of the cultural renaissance that was the social counterpart of the political movement for the civil rights of Mexican Americans . Cantinflas ' use of social themes and style is seen as a precursor to Chicano theater . A cartoon series , the ' ' Cantinflas Show ' ' , was made in 1972 starring an animated Cantinflas . The show was targeted for children and was intended to be educational . The first animated version animated by Santiago Moro and his brother Jose Luis Show ) which educated children by meeting such notable people such as Chopin , Louis Pasteur , Albert Einstein and William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet as well learning how important water and oil is and educational parodies of some of his famous movies like ' ' Su Excelencia ' ' La Carta with incidental music from Aaron Copeland 's El Salon Mexico In the second version his character was known as ' ' Little Amigo ' ' and concentrated on a wide range of subjects intended to educate children , from the origin of soccer to the reasons behind the International Date Line . The second animated series animated in 1979 and dubbed in English in 1982 was a joint venture between Televisa and Hanna-Barbera and Mario Morenos voiced Little Amigo /Cantinflas in the Spanish version and Don Messick voiced Little Amigo and John Stephenson as the narrator in the English version . Both The Cantinflas Show and Amigos and Friends aired in the mid 1990 's on Univision and Televisa re aired The Cantinflas Show in the mid 1990 's . Although Cantinflas never achieved the same success in with a star in the Hollywood Walk of Fame . He earned two Golden Globe nominations ( winning one ) for best actor and the Mexican Academy of Film Lifetime Achievement Award . His handprints have been imbedded onto the Paseo de las Luminarias for his work in motion pictures . The Mario Moreno Cantinflas Award is handed out annually for entertainers who represent the Latino community with the same humor and distinction as the legendary Mario Moreno Cantinflas and who , like Cantinflas , utilizes his power to help those most in need . Cantinflas films are distributed in North America by # Characterisations # Moreno 's life is the subject of the biographical film ' ' Cantinflas ' ' ( 2014 , directed by Sebastian del Amo ) . It stars scar Jaenada , who portrays a young Mario Moreno attempting to gain respect and make a living as an actor , and award winning actor Michael Imperioli as Mike Todd , an American film-producer struggling to film his masterpiece . The film is centered in Moreno 's personal life , and in the development of Todd 's Golden . # References in pop culture # In the season 9 episode of the animated sitcom ' ' King of the Hill ' ' , Death Buys a Timeshare , Hank 's father Cotton is lured into buying a timeshare that includes access to an exclusive yacht whose private chef once worked for Cantinflas . In the episode , Cotton pronounces Cantinflas , . The Mindless Self Indulgence song Whipstickagostop has the lyrics Cantinflas was a body rocker in it . # Critical response # Cantinflas is sometimes seen as a Mexican Groucho Marx character , one who uses his skill with words to puncture the pretensions of the wealthy and powerful , the police and the government . Historian and author of ' ' Cantinflas and the Chaos of Mexican Modernity ' ' , writes , Cantinflas symbolized the underdog who triumphed through trickery over more powerful opponents and presents Cantinflas as a self-image of a transitional Mexico . Gregorio Luke , executive director of the Museum of Latin American Art said , To understand Cantinflas is to understand what happened in Mexico during the last century . Monsivis interprets spoken word in the context of Mexico 's reigning illiteracy ( 70% in 1930 ) . Particularly in the film ' ' El analfabeto ' ' , ( ' ' The Illiterate ' ' ) , Cantinflas is the illiterate who takes control of the language by whatever means he can . The journalist Salvador Novo interprets the role of Moreno 's character entirely in terms of ' ' Cantinflismo ' ' : ' ' En condensarlos : en entregar a la saludable carcajada del pueblo la esencia demaggica de su vacuo confusionismo , estriba el mrito y se asegura la gloria de este hijo cazurro de la ciudad ladina y burlona de Mxico , que es ' Cantinflas . ( In condensing them the leaders of the world and of Mexico , in returning to the healthy laughter of the people the demagogic essence of their empty confusion , merit is sustained and glory is ensured for the self-contained son of the Spanish-speaking mocker of Mexico , who Cantinflas portrays . ) In his biography of the comic , scholar of Mexican culture Jeffrey M. Pilcher views Cantinflas as a that was just out of reach for the majority of Mexicans : His nonsense language eloquently expressed the contradictions of modernity as ' the palpitating moment of everything that wants to be that which it can not be ' . Likewise , Social hierarchies , speech patterns , ethnic identities , and masculine forms of behavior all crumbled before his chaotic humor , to be reformulated in revolutionary new ways . # Filmography # # Awards and nominations # 
 Herne ( ) is a municipality in the province of Flemish Brabant , in Flanders , one of the three regions of Belgium . The municipality comprises the towns of Herfelingen , Herne proper and Sint-Pieters-Kapelle . On January 1 , 2006 Herne had a total population of 6,407 . The total area is 44.63 km which gives a population density of 144 inhabitants per km. 
 ' ' Inherit the Wind ' ' may refer to : * ' ' Inherit the Wind ' ' ( play ) , a 1955 play by Jerome Lawrence and Robert Edwin Lee * ' ' Inherit the Wind ' ' ( 1960 film ) , directed by Stanley Kramer ; starring Spencer Tracy , Fredric March , and Gene Kelly * ' ' Inherit the Wind ' ' ( 1965 film ) , a television film starring Melvyn Douglas and Ed Begley * ' ' Inherit the Wind ' ' ( 1988 film ) , a television film starring Jason Robards , Kirk Douglas , and Darren McGavin * ' ' Inherit the Wind ' ' ( 1999 film ) , a television film starring Jack Lemmon , George C. Scott , and Beau Bridges 
 The Mingus Big Band is an ensemble , based in New York City , that specializes in the compositions of Charles Mingus . It is managed by his widow , Sue Mingus , along with the Mingus Orchestra and Mingus Dynasty . In addition to its weekly Monday night appearance at Jazz Standard in New York City , the Mingus Big Band also tours frequently giving performances and clinics in America , Europe and other parts of the world . The band has received six Grammy nominations and won a Grammy in 2011 for Best Large Jazz Ensemble Album for the album ' ' Mingus Big Band Live at Jazz Standard ' ' # Band roster # The band has featured an array of musicians : *Steve Slagle *Randy Brecker *Frank Lacy *John Stubblefield *Chris Potter *Ryan Kisor *Alex Foster *Jack Walrath ( an alumnus of one of Mingus 's last bands ) , *Vincent Herring *Ronnie Cuber *John Hicks *Seamus Blake *Jimmy Knepper *Alex Sipiagin *Earl McIntyre *Boris Kozlov *Donald Edwards *Helen Sung *David Kikoski *Wayne Escoffery *Craig Handy *Orrin Evans *Conrad Herwig *Scott Robinson *Greg Gisbert Nostalgia in Times Square ( 1993 ) ' ' * ' ' Gunslinging Birds ( 1995 ) ' ' * ' ' Live in Time ( 1997 ) ' ' * ' ' Que Viva Mingus ! ( 1998 ) ' ' * ' ' Blues and Politics ( 1999 ) ' ' * ' ' The Essential Mingus Big Band ( 2001 ) ' ' * ' ' Tonight at Noon ( 2002 ) ' ' * ' ' I Am Three ( 2005 ) ' ' * ' ' Live in Tokyo at the Blue Note ( 2006 ) * ' ' Mingus Big Band Live at Jazz Standard ( 2010 ) ' ' 
 Buckeye may refer to : * Buckeye ( tree ) , several tree species of the genus ' ' Aesculus ' ' * Buckeye ( nickname ) , a nickname for residents of the U.S. state of Ohio , the buckeye state ** Ohio State Buckeyes , the intercollegiate athletic teams of Ohio State University ** Brutus Buckeye , the mascot of The Ohio State University * Buckeye ( chicken ) , a breed of chicken originating in Ohio * Buckeye , a named passenger train operated by the Pennsylvania Railroad between Cleveland , Ohio and Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania * Buckeyes , the athletic teams of Nelsonville-York High School , Nelsonville , Ohio * Buckeye Industries , an American aircraft manufacturer * Junonia coenia , also called Buckeye , a butterfly in the family Nymphalidae found in the United States and Canada * T-2 Buckeye , an aircraft * Buckeye candy ( a.k.a . Buckeyes ) , a peanut butter and chocolate candy made to resemble the nut of a buckeye tree * Buckeye , a song by Lamb of God from the album ' ' Burn The ; Places in the United States * Buckeye , Arizona * Buckeye , California ( disambiguation ) * Buckeye , Colorado * Buckeye , Indiana * Buckeye , Iowa * Buckeye , Kansas * Buckeye , Kentucky * Buckeye , New Mexico * Buckeye Township ( disambiguation ) * Buckeye , West Virginia * Buckeye Lake , Ohio * Buckeye-Shaker , a neighborhood of Cleveland , Ohio # People # * Garland Buckeye ( 1897-1975 ) , a former professional football and baseball player ; Fictional characters * Nathan Buckeye Heywood or Citizen Steel , a DC Comics character 
 deathdate = children = Ann Forest Banaszewski Eugene Scalia John Francis Scalia Catherine Elisabeth Courtney Mary Clare Scalia Paul David Scalia Matthew Scalia Christopher James Scalia Margaret Jane Scalia Antonin Gregory Scalia ( ; born March 11 , 1936 ) is an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States . As the longest-serving justice currently on the Court , Scalia is the Senior Associate Justice . Appointed to the Court by President Ronald Reagan in 1986 , Scalia has been described as the intellectual anchor for the originalist and textualist position in the Court 's conservative wing . Scalia was born in Trenton , New Jersey , and attended public grade school and Catholic high school in New York City , where his family had moved . He attended Georgetown University as an undergraduate and obtained his Bachelor of Laws degree from Harvard Law School . After spending six years in a Cleveland law firm , he became a law school professor . In the early 1970s , he served in the Nixon and Ford administrations , first at minor administrative agencies , and then the Carter years teaching at the University of Chicago , where he became one of the first faculty advisers of the fledgling Federalist Society . In 1982 , he was appointed as a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit by President Ronald Reagan . In 1986 , Scalia was appointed by Reagan to the Supreme Court to fill the associate justice seat vacated when Justice William Rehnquist was elevated to Chief Justice . Whereas Rehnquist 's confirmation was contentious , Scalia was asked few difficult questions by the Senate Judiciary Committee , and faced no opposition . Scalia was unanimously confirmed by the Senate , becoming the first Italian-American justice . Scalia has served on the Court for nearly thirty years , during which time he has established a solidly conservative voting record and ideology , advocating textualism in statutory interpretation and originalism in constitutional interpretation . He is a strong defender of the powers of the executive branch , believing presidential power should be paramount in many areas . He opposes affirmative action and other policies that treat minorities as groups . and , in his minority opinions , often castigates the Court 's majority in scathing language . # Early life and education # An only child , Scalia was born in Trenton , New Jersey , on March 11 , 1936 . He became a Professor of Law at the University of Virginia in 1967 , moving his family to Charlottesville , Virginia . After four years in Charlottesville , in 1971 , Scalia entered public service . President Richard Nixon appointed him as the general counsel for the Office of Telecommunications Policy , where one of his principal assignments was to formulate federal policy for the growth of cable television . From 1972 to 1974 , he was the chairman of the Administrative Conference of the United States , a small independent agency that sought to improve the functioning of the federal bureaucracy . In mid-1974 , Nixon nominated him as United States Assistant Attorney General In the aftermath of Watergate scandal Following Ford 's defeat by President Jimmy Carter , Scalia worked for several months at the American Enterprise Institute . He then returned to academia , taking up to 1982 , though he spent one year as a visiting professor at Stanford Law School . In 1981 , he became the first faculty adviser for the University of Chicago 's chapter of the newly founded Federalist Society . # Judge and nominee # When Ronald Reagan was elected President in November 1980 , Scalia hoped for a major position in the new administration . He was interviewed for the position of Solicitor General of the United States , but the position went to Rex E. Lee , to Scalia 's great disappointment . Scalia was offered a seat on the Chicago-based United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in early 1982 , but declined it , hoping to be appointed to the highly influential United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ( D.C. Circuit ) . Later that year , Reagan offered Scalia a seat on the D.C. Circuit , which Scalia accepted . He was confirmed by the United States Senate on August 5 , 1982 , and was sworn in on August 17 , 1982 . On the D.C. Circuit , legal circles for powerful , witty legal writing , which was often critical of the Supreme Court precedents he felt bound as a lower-court judge to follow . Scalia 's opinions drew the attention of Reagan administration officials , who , according to ' ' The New York Times ' ' , liked virtually everything they saw and .. listed him as a leading Supreme Court prospect . Scalia has taken a broad view of the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution # Individual rights # # #Abortion# # Scalia has argued that there is no constitutional right to abortion , and that if the people desire legalized abortion , a law should be passed to accomplish it . Scalia wrote in his dissenting opinion in the 1992 case of ' ' Planned Parenthood v. Casey ' ' , # The States may , if they wish , permit abortion on demand , but the Constitution does not require them to do so . The permissibility of abortion , and the limitations upon it , are to be resolved like most important questions in our democracy : by citizens trying found thermal imaging of a home to be an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment . The Court struck down a conviction for marijuana manufacture based on a search warrant issued after such scans were conducted , which showed that the garage was considerably hotter than the rest of the house because of indoor growing lights . Uncomfortable with the changes brought about following Vatican II , Scalia regularly attends the Tridentine Latin Mass in both Chicago and Washington , and has driven long distances to parishes that he felt were more in accord with his beliefs . In a 2013 interview with Jennifer Senior for ' ' New York ' ' magazine , Scalia was asked if his beliefs extended to the Devil , Scalia stated , Of course ! Yeah , he 's a real person . Hey , c'm on , that 's standard Catholic doctrine ! Every Catholic believes that . When asked if he had seen recent evidence of the Devil , Scalia replied , You know , it is curious . In the Gospels , the Devil is doing all sorts of things . He people and whatnot What he s doing now is getting people not to believe in him or in God . He s much more successful that way . Senior , Jennifer ( 2013 ) . ' ' New York ' ' Magazine , October 14 , 2013 , p. 26 . In another 2013 interview , Scalia stated that In order for capitalism to work , in order for it to produce a good and stable society , traditional Christian virtues are essential . In 2006 , Scalia , approached by a reporter upon leaving church , was asked if being a traditional Catholic had caused problems for him . He responded by asking , You know what I say to those people ? , and with a gesture , cupping his hand under his chin and flicking his fingers out . The gesture , which was captured by a photographer , was initially reported by the ' ' Boston Herald ' ' as obscene . Scalia responded to the reports with a letter to the editor accusing the news staff of watching too many episodes of ' ' The Sopranos brush-off . Roger Axtell , an expert on body language , described the gesture as possibly meaning I 've had enough , go away and noted , It 's a fairly strong gesture . # Assessment # In 2009 , after nearly a quarter century on the Court , Scalia characterized his victories as damn few . His biographer , Joan Biskupic , speculated that Scalia , health permitting , might remain on the Court for another decade . Writing in ' ' The Forward ' ' , J.J. Goldberg described Scalia as the intellectual anchor of the court 's conservative majority . <ref> Citation Whereas he is widely admired among conservatives , many liberals dislike his views . In March 2009 , openly gay Congressman Barney Frank described him as a homophobe . <ref> Citation Rossum , writing in 2006 , before George W. Bush appointees John Roberts His dislike of legislative history may be a reason why other justices have become more cautious in its use . Gregory Maggs wrote in the ' ' Public Interest Law Review ' ' in 1995 that by the early 1990s , legislative Supreme Court cases involving the interpretation of statutes , and no case of that era used legislative history as an essential reason for the outcome . Maggs suggested , # With Justice Scalia breathing down the necks of anyone who peeks into the Congressional Record or Senate reports , the other members of the Court may have concluded that the benefit of citing legislative history does not outweigh its costs . It is likely for this reason that the percentage of cases citing it has decreased dramatically . No one likes an unnecessary fight , especially not one with as formidable an opponent as Justice Scalia. # # Works # * Scalia , Antonin , and Gutmann , Amy , ed. , ( 1997 ) ' ' A Matter of Interpretation : Federal Courts and the Law ' ' ( Princeton N.J. : Princeton University Press ) ISBN 0-691-00400-5. * Scalia , Antonin ; Garner , Bryan A. ( 2008 ) ' ' Making Your Case : The Art of Persuading Judges ' ' ( St. Paul : Thomson West ) ISBN 978-0-314-18471-9. * Scalia , Antonin ; Garner , Bryan Interpretation of Legal Texts ' ' ( St. Paul : Thomson West ) ISBN 978-0314275554. # Notes # 
 birthplace= Fullerton , California United States Suzanne J. Crough ( born March 6 , 1963 ; Fullerton , California ) is a former actress best known for her role as Tracy Partridge , from the hit television sitcom ' ' The Partridge Family ' ' , which ran from September 25 , 1970 - March 23 , 1974. # Career # On ' ' The Partridge Family ' ' , she played Tracy Partridge , the youngest child , who sang backing vocals and played the tambourine . After ' ' The Partridge Family ' ' , she made several TV movies and made many guest appearances in TV shows like ' ' Mulligan 's Stew ' ' in 1977 , she played the niece of the stars , Lawrence Pressman and Elinor Donahue . Her last on-screen role was in ' ' Children of Divorce ' ' in 1980 . She is a graduate of Los Angeles Pierce College , and until 1993 she owned and operated a bookstore . On March 2 , 2010 , during a reunion interview with her co-stars from ' ' The and former actor Jeremy Gelbwaks as well as actress Shirley Jones ) on NBC 's ' ' The Today Show ' ' , she stated that she is a manager at an Office Max in Bullhead City , AZ . She has also appeared in many other reunion shows with her Partridge Family co-stars. # Filmography # 1980 : ' ' Children Of Divorce ( 1980 film ) Children Of Divorce ' ' ( TV ) ... Kate 1978 : The New Adventures Of ' ' Wonder Woman ( TV series ) ' ' ... Girl #2 ( Minor Role ) 1978 : ' ' Teenage Father ' ' ( short ) ... Teenage Mother 1977 : ' ' Mulligan 's Stew ' ' .. Stevie Freedman ( 7 episodes ) 1977 : ' ' Fred Flintstone and Friends ' ' ( Voice ) 1976 : ' ' Dawn : Portrait of a Teenage Runaway ' ' .. Runaway 1974-1975 : ' ' The Partridge Family 2200 A.D. ' ' .. Tracy Partridge ( Voice ) 1973 : ' ' Goober and the Ghost Chasers ' ' .. Tracy Partridge ( ' .. Tracy Partridge 
 The year 1907 in film involved some significant events . TOC # Events # * January 19 - ' ' Variety ' ' publishes its first film review . * May 7 - Seattle film maker William Harbeck sets up a camera at the front of a B.C. Electric streetcar and films the downtown streets of Vancouver , British Columbia . Pieces of the film , the earliest surviving footage of the city , have disappeared , only about 7 minutes remain . * June 20 - ' ' L'Enfant prodigue ' ' , the first feature-length motion picture produced in Europe , opens in Paris . * November 28 - In Haverhill , Massachusetts , scrap-metal dealer Louis B. Mayer opens his first movie theater ( in a few years he had the largest theater chain in New England and in 1917 he founded his own production company , which eventually became part of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer ) . * Carl Laemmle , later of Universal , experiments with combining audio from phonographs with film . Laemmle 's experiments lead to the German development of Syncroscope . Syncroscope had The Kalem Company founded in New York City by Frank J. Marion , Samuel Long , and George Kleine . They would make the first ' ' Ben-Hur ' ' film , directed by Sidney Olcott. # Films released in 1907 # * ' ' 20,000 Lieues Sous les Mers ' ' * ' ' Ben-Hur ' ' , directed by Sidney Olcott * ' ' The Eclipse ' ' , directed by Georges Melies * ' ' The Enchanted Sedan Chair ' ' , directed by Georges Melies * ' ' First Prize for the Cello ' ' * ' ' The Good Glue Stick ' ' , directed by Georges Melies * ' ' The Golden Beetle ' ' , directed by Segundo de Chomon * ' ' Laughing Gas ' ' , directed by Edwin S. Porter * ' ' Le cochon danseur ' ' * ' ' L'Enfant prodigue ' ' * ' ' The Lion Hunt ' ' * ' ' The Policemen 's Little Run ' ' , directed by Ferdinand Zecca * ' ' The Red Spectre ' ' , directed by Segundo de Bertrand ' ' , directed by Georges Melies * ' ' The Runaway Horse ' ' , directed by Louis J. Gasnier * ' ' Salaviinanpolttajat ' ' * ' ' El Sartorio ' ' * ' ' That Fatal Sneeze ' ' , directed by Lewin Fitzhamon , produced by Cecil Hepworth * ' ' Tunneling the Channel ' ' , directed by Georges Melies * ' ' Vancouver ' ' directed by William Harbeck # Births # * January 3 - Ray Milland , actor ( d. 1986 ) * January 16 - Alexander Knox , actor ( d. 1995 ) * January 20 - Paula Wessely , actress , producer ( d. 2000 ) * January 22 - Mary Dresselhuys , actress , ( d. 2004 ) * February 12 - Joseph Kearns , actor ( d. 1962 ) * February 15 - Cesar Romero , actor ( d. 1994 ) * February 17 - Buster Crabbe , actor ( d. 1983 ) * February 22 - Robert Young , actor ( d. 1998 ) * March 11 - Jessie Matthews , actress , singer ( d. 1981 d. 1985 ) * March 31 - Eddie Quillan , actor ( d. 1990 ) * April 3 - Iron Eyes Cody , actor ( d. 1999 ) * April 11 - Paul Douglas , actor ( d. 1959 ) * April 19 - Lina Basquette , actress ( d. 1994 ) * April 29 - Fred Zinnemann , director ( d. 1997 ) * May 12 - Katharine Hepburn , actress ( d. 2003 ) * May 22 - Lord Laurence Olivier , actor ( d. 1989 ) * May 26 - John Wayne , actor ( d. 1979 ) * June 4 - Rosalind Russell , actress ( d. 1976 ) * June 16 - Jack Albertson , actor ( d. 1981 ) * June 24 - Martha Sleeper , actress ( d. 1987 ) * July 14 - Olive Borden , actress ( d. 1947 ) * July 16 - Barbara Stanwyck , actress ( d. 1990 ) * July 19 - Isabel Jewell , actress ( d. 1972 ) * July 27 - Ross Alexander , actor ( d. 1937 ) * August 3 - Adrienne Ames Joe Besser , actor , comedian ( d. 1988 ) * September 15 - Fay Wray , actress ( d. 2004 ) * September 29 - Gene Autry , actor ( d. 1998 ) * December 16 - Barbara Kent , actress ( d. 2011 ) * December 22 - Peggy Ashcroft , actress ( d. 1991 ) * December 25 - Mike Mazurki , Austrian-American actor ( d. 1990 ) # Deaths # * August 30 - Richard Mansfield , stage actor who influenced many later film actors # Debuts # * Linda Arvidson - Mr. Gay and Mrs. ( short ) * Robert Harron - Dr. Skinium ( short ) * William S. Hart - Ben Hur ( short ) * Florence Turner - How to Cure a Cold ( short ) 
 A gambit ( from ancient Italian ' ' gambetto ' ' , meaning tripping ) is a chess opening in which a player , more often White , sacrifices material , usually a pawn , with the hope of achieving a resulting advantageous position . Some well-known examples are the King 's Gambit ( 1. e4 e5 2. f4 ) , Queen 's Gambit ( 1. d4 d5 2. c4 ) , and Evans Gambit ( 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 ) . A gambit used by Black may also be called a gambit ( e.g. the Latvian Gambit -- 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 f5 or Englund Gambit -- 1. d4 e5 ) , but is sometimes called a countergambit ( e.g. the Albin Countergambit -- 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 and Greco Counter-Gambit , an old-fashioned name for the Latvian Gambit ) . The word gambit was originally applied to chess openings in 1561 by Spain # Strategy # class= toccolours style= margin : 0 0 1em 1em ; border:none ; font-size : 95% ; clear e f g h a b c d e f g h Gambits are often said to be ' offered ' to an opponent , and that offer is then said to be either ' accepted ' or ' declined . ' If a player who is offered a gambit captures the piece ( and thus gains material ) the gambit is said to be accepted . If the player who was offered the gambit ignores it and instead continues his or her development , then the gambit is said to be declined . In modern chess , the typical response to a moderately sound gambit is to accept the material and give the material back at an advantageous time . For gambits that are less sound , the accepting player is more likely to try to hold onto his extra material . A rule of thumb often found in various primers on chess suggests that a player should get three moves ( see tempo ) of development for a sacrificed pawn , but it is unclear how useful this general maxim is since the free moves part of the compensation . Of course , a player is not obliged to accept a gambit . Often , a gambit can be declined without disadvantage . # Soundness # A gambit is said to be ' sound ' if it is capable of procuring some concession from the opponent . There are three general criteria in which a gambit is often said to be sound : *Time gain : the player accepting the gambit must take time to procure the sacrificed material and possibly must use more time to reorganize his pieces after the material is taken . *Generation of differential activity : Often a player accepting a gambit will decentralize his pieces or pawns and his poorly placed pieces will allow the gambiteer to place his own pieces and pawns on squares that might otherwise have been inaccessible . In addition , bishops and rooks can become more active simply because the loss of pawns often gives rise to open file ( chess ) *Generation of positional weaknesses : Finally , accepting a gambit may lead to a compromised pawn structure , holes or other positional deficiencies . A good example of e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4 . Bc4 . Here Black can force White to sacrifice a pawn speculatively with 4 ... Bb4+ , but White gets very good compensation for one pawn after 5. c3 dxc3 6. bxc3 , or for two pawns after 6.0-0 inviting 6 ... cxb2 7 . Bxb2 , due to the development advantage and attacking chances against the black king . As a result , Black is often advised not to try to hold onto the extra pawn . A more dubious gambit is the so-called Halloween Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . Nc3 Nf6 4 . Nxe5 ? ! Nxe5 5. d4 . Here the investment ( a knight for just one pawn ) is too large for the moderate advantage of having a strong center . # Examples # *King 's Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2. f4 *Queen 's Gambit : 1. d4 d5 2. c4 *Evans Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 *Rousseau Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . intending 2. .. cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4 . Nxc3 *Two Knights Defence : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . Bc4 Nf6 4 . Ng5 d5 with 5. exd5 Na5 6 . Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 likely to follow . *BlackmarDiemer Gambit ( BDG ) : 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3 . Nc3 followed by 4. f3 *From 's Gambit : 1. f4 e5 *Staunton Gambit : 1. d4 f5 2. e4 *Budapest Gambit : 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 *Scotch Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4 . Bc4 *Latvian Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 f5 *Blackburne Shilling Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . Bc4 Nd4 ? ! : This is not a true gambit by Black , since after 4 . Nxe5 ! ? Qg5 ! Black wins material . White can ( and from this position should ) play a gambit himself with 5 . Bxf7+ ! Ke7 6.0-0 ! Qxe5 7 . Bxg8 Rxg8 8. c3 Nc6 9. d4 , when White 's two pawns and , give White strong compensation for the sacrificed bishop . *Elephant Gambit : 1. e4 e5 2 . Nf3 d5 ! ? *Englund Gambit : 1. d4 e5 ? ! *Italian Gambit : 1 . e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . Bc4 Bc5 4. d4 *Fried Liver Attack : 1 . e4 e5 2 . Nf3 Nc6 3 . Bc4 Nf6 4 . Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nxd5 6 . Nxf7 Kxf7 *Albin Countergambit : 1 . d4 d5 2. c4 e5 *Benko Gambit : 1 . d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 # Notes # # Further reading # * 
 The River Mole is a tributary of the River Thames in southern England . It rises in West Sussex near Horsham and flows north west through Surrey for 80km mi to the Thames at East Molesey , opposite Hampton Court Palace . The river gives its name to the Surrey district of Mole Valley . The Mole crosses the North Downs between Dorking and Leatherhead , where it cuts a steep-sided valley , known as the Mole Gap , through the chalk . Much of the catchment area lies on impermeable rock ( including Wealden Clay and London Clay ) , meaning that the river level responds rapidly to heavy rainfall . During the second half of the 20th century pollution levels in the river were high , however since 1995 the water quality has improved dramatically and the Mole now boasts the greatest diversity of fish species of any river in England . Twelve Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSIs ) that include wetland habitats are located within the Mole catchment area and the stretch of river through Leatherhead has been designated a Local Nature Reserve of Conservation and is an SSSI of European importance . The river has captured the imagination of several authors and poets , particularly since in very hot summers the river channel can become dry between Dorking and Leatherhead ( most recently during the 1976 drought ) . In John Speed 's 1611 map of Surrey this stretch of the river is denoted by a series of hills accompanied by the legend The river runneth under . However the river 's name is unlikely to have derived from this behaviour : The ' ' Oxford Dictionary of English Place Names ' ' suggests that ' ' Mole ' ' either comes from the Latin ' ' mola ' ' ( a mill ) or is a back-formation from ' ' Molesey ' ' ( Mul 's island ) . Domesday Book lists twenty mills on the river in 1086 , of which Sidlow Mill was the oldest , dating from Saxon times . # Catchment area # The drainage area of the River Mole is 512 km and forms 5% of the River Thames catchment area above Teddington . Annually the catchment average level of rainfall is 800 mm rain around Crawley . The Mole catchment reaches a maximum elevation of 265m ft above Ordnance Datum at Leith Hill to the south west of Dorking . There is only one aquifer in the drainage basin , at Fetcham , which means that the majority of the water in the river is from surface drainage , particularly from Gatwick Airport and the urban areas of Horley and Crawley , and that the flow rate responds rapidly to rainfall . # Course # # Upper Mole # River Mole rises in Baldhorns Copse 0.7kmmi 1 to the south of the village of Rusper in West Sussex . The river flows initially southwards for 1kmmi 1 to a small lake at Baldhorns Park , before running eastwards through a largely rural area towards Crawley . The first tributaries to join the young river drain the northernmost part of St Leonard 's Forest , between Horsham and Crawley , although much of the forest is in the catchment area of the River Arun . The Mole skirts the northern suburbs of Crawley where it is joined by Ifield Mill Pond . The first gauging station on the Mole is south of Gatwick Airport ( 57 m above OD ) . **16;3929;ref The gauging station south of Gatwick Airport was installed in 2005 , replacing an earlier station located 200 m ( 200 yds ) downstream . The mean flow is 0.33m3/s cuft/s and the river ran dry at this point for the first time in the summer of 1995 . The Mole runs under the airport runway in a culvert completed in 1985 . The course of the Mole within the airport perimeter has been altered several times since commercial flights began in 1945 ; however the meanders visible on the 1839 tithe map in the 1.5 km stretch immediately north of the runway were reinstated in 1999 , in a 1.2 million project to facilitate airport expansion . The Mole enters Surrey to the south of Horley , where it meets the Gatwick Stream , a tributary draining Worth Forest to the southeast of Crawley . The second-largest Sewage Treatment Works ( STW ) in the Mole catchment is located on the Gatwick Stream 3km mi upstream 15 megalitres ( 15,000 m <sup> 3 </sup> ) of water per day , and in prolonged dry periods it accounts for up to 75% of the flow of the Mole downstream of the confluence . The mean flow measured at Horley gauging station ( 52 m above OD ) is 1.40m3/s cuft/s . The Mole passes Horley to the west , flowing north towards Sidlow and entering a largely rural area . 0.7kmmi 1 south of Sidlow the mean flow is measured as 2.21m3/s cuft/s at Kinnersley Manor gauging station ( 48 m above OD ) . The Earlswood Brook , a tributary draining the urban area of Reigate and Redhill , joins the Mole at Sidlow . The largest STW in the Mole catchment ( Reigate STW ) discharges up to 118.5 megalitres per day into the Earlswood Brook . **16;3947;ref A principal tributary of the Earlswood Brook is the Redhill Brook , which includes The Moors wetland nature reserve within its catchment area . From Sidlow the Mole turns north west towards Brockham . A number of minor tributaries join the river from the west and are typically Horsham and Dorking . The 18th century weir at Betchworth was modified in 2004 to facilitate the installation of two 27.5 kW low-head hydro turbines . About 90% of the energy generated is fed into the regional electricity grid , while the remainder is used to supply the Betchworth Park Estate , where the weir is situated . The river leaves the Wealden Clay at Brockham , passing Betchworth Castle and flowing briefly across greensand and Gault Clay to Pixham , 1kmmi 1 north east of Dorking . A mean flow of 3.74m3/s cuft/s is measured at a fourth gauging station , located at Castle Mill ( 39 m above OD ) . At Pixham the Mole meets the Pipp Brook , a tributary draining the northeastern slopes of Leith Hill . **16;3965;ref The Pipp Brook drains the northernmost heavily wooded slopes of Leith Hill ( which include Squire 's Great Wood and Abinger Forest ) , as well as areas of Wotton , Westcott and Dorking . # Mole Gap # Between Dorking and Leatherhead the Mole cuts a steep-sided valley ( the Mole Gap ) though the North Downs western flank of Box Hill and a smaller 50 m cliff at Ham Bank in Norbury Park . The sudden change from impermeable Wealden Clay to permeable chalk and the increased gradient of the river ( which drops 15 m in the six mile ( 10 km ) stretch between Brockham and Leatherhead , compared to 3 m in 12 mi between Horley and Brockham ) allow the water table to drop below the bed of the river . Water is able to flow out of the river through swallow holes in the bed and banks , decreasing the volume of water carried in the main channel . The course of the river through Norbury Park was partially straightened when the Epsom to Horsham railway was built in 1837 , with the removal of a small meander north of Westhumble . The meander was reinstated in 1997 , in an attempt to enhance this area of the Park , although it has since become blocked by silt . The entirety of the Mole Gap lies within the Surrey Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty . # Lower Mole # At Leatherhead flow across impermeable London Clay , winding towards Cobham . The water table rises at this point and much of the water which drained out of the channel through the chalk returns through springs in the riverbed . The aquifer at Fetcham is the only one in the entire catchment area . The next major tributary , The Rye , ( which drains Ashtead ) joins to the north of Leatherhead , before the river is crossed by the M25 motorway . At Cobham the river swings round in a pronounced axe-head meander skirting Painshill Landscape Garden , where a 35 ft diameter waterwheel raises water 5 m from the river to feed the ornamental lake in the park . **16;3983;ref The undershot wheel at Painshill Park was restored in 1987 and is located at the end of an artificial leat , rather than on the main river channel . From Painshill Park the river flows northeastwards to the Thames , passing to the west of Esher Commons and then forming the boundary between Hersham and Esher , where the mean flow of the river is 5.43m3/s cuft/s . In response September 1968 , the river was modified downstream of Albany Bridge to the Thames and new flood defences were constructed . Finally the Mole splits into two branches at the Island Barn Reservoir near Molesey : the northern ( and smaller ) branch continues as the River Mole and the southern branch is known as the River Ember . The two rivers flow either side of the reservoir , before running side by side in a north easterly direction , merging 400 m before the confluence with the River Thames , on the reach above Teddington Lock . ( For the purposes of the remainder of this article , the River Mole and the River Ember are treated as a single entity . ) Prior to the last Ice Age , the River Thames followed a more northerly route to the North Sea , from Reading via Marlow , Chorleywood , St Albans , Hertford and along the present Suffolk-Essex border . During this period , the Mole is thought to have merged with the River Wey near Byfleet and then flowed in a north-easterly direction via Richmond to meet the and Wey are less than 2km mi apart at their closest point near Painshill Park ) . During the Middle Pleistocene period , **16;4001;ref The Middle Pleistocene period was ca. 781,000-126,000 years ago a large ice sheet built up across much of the East of England , reaching as far south as St Albans and Chelmsford , blocking the path of the proto-Thames . Glacial meltwater from the Anglian ice sheet , caused the Thames to divert southwards and flood the valley of the Mole-Wey river , thus adopting its present route through London . # Ecology # # Water quality # The water quality of the watercourses in the River Mole catchment area has improved dramatically since the 1990s . In 1990 the Environment Agency assessed only 23% of the watercourses as Grade B ( good ) or better , but by 2002 60% had reached this standard . Investment in the Sewage Treatment Works within the catchment area has improved the quality of the discharges into the river and modifications to the runway and apron drainage systems at Gatwick Airport means that surface water is diverted to aerated pollution released into the river . There have been a number of high profile pollution incidents of the river in recent years : In 2003 , Gatwick Airport Ltd pleaded guilty to charges of allowing chemical pollution to enter the River Mole after a detergent , used to clean rubber and oil from the runway , was washed into Crawters Brook by airport workers . The Environment Agency estimated that up to 5200 fish of 14 different species were killed as the pollution spread downstream . The airport was fined 30,000 by Lewes Crown Court . In May 2003 , sewage leaking from a pump operated by Thames Water leaked into the Stanford Brook killing a number of coarse fish in the Gatwick Stream . # Biodiversity # The Marsh Frog ' ' Pelophylax ridibundus ' ' ( a non-native species introduced from Europe in the 1930s ) is now commonly found in the upper Mole and its tributaries around Newdigate and Gatwick . There is no evidence that the presence of the frogs has had a deleterious effect on indigenous amphibians . A second non-native species , the Edible Frog ( to a site at Newdigate in the early 1900s . It has in 2008 been recorded in tributaries of the River Mole at Capel and Brockham . The River Mole has the most diverse fish population of any river in England . The Gatwick Stream is dominated by coarse fish such as brown trout , brook lamprey , and eel . In 2003 , the upper River Mole near Meath Green Lane , Salfords , was enhanced to create a gravel spawning area to encourage chub and dace in addition to roach . In 1974 zander , a non-indigenous coarse fish native to Europe , were introduced legally to Old Bury Hill Lake which supplies the Pipp Brook . Zander have been caught in the Lower Mole below Dorking since the 1980s . In the Mole Gap between Dorking and Leatherhead the river supports populations of chub , dace , barbel , brown trout . Both barbel and brown trout are extremely sensitive to water quality and pollution . Below Leatherhead the river has historically supported larger predatory fish including chub , perch , pike , and eels , however in . North of Esher the old river channel is dominated by floating pennywort , a highly invasive weed , which cuts off all light to the river bed , reducing oxygen levels and resulting in a poor habitat for fish . The Ember flood relief channel has a diverse fish population , including chub , dace , roach , bleak , large pike and barbel . At the confluence of the Mole and the River Thames at Hampton Court Palace it is possible to catch a wide variety of coarse fish species . The geographical distribution of many species of invertebrate in the river reflects the geology of the catchment area . Viviparid snails and water scorpions ( of the genus ' ' Nepidae ' ' ) are commonly found where the river runs over the London Clay . Crayfish are common in areas associated with high alkalinity particularly around Brockham and the tributaries which run over the Wealden Clay provide an excellent habitat for stoneflies , caddisflies , fast swimming mayflies and riffle beetles . The Beautiful Demoiselle ( ' ' Calopteryx virgo ' ' ) disappeared from the River but has since recolonised . The White-legged Damselfly ( ' ' Platycnemis pennipes ' ' ) is also found along the river and the Downy Emerald ( ' ' Cordulia aenea ' ' ) is found between Box Hill and Leatherhead . The Mole is one of only three locations in England where the River Shingle Beetle ' ' Meotica anglica ' ' is found . A nationally scarce species which is locally common on the River Mole is the Greater Dodder ' ' Cuscuta europaea ' ' . # Conservation # The Mole catchment area includes twelve Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSIs ) which include wetland habitats and the stretch of river through Leatherhead has been designated a Local Nature Reserve . The Mole Gap forms part of a Special Area of Conservation and is an SSSI of European importance . The stretch of river between Thorncroft Manor ( 1 km south of Leatherhead ) and River Lane in Fetcham has been designated a Local Nature Reserve . Although much of the surrounding land has been taken by residential and commercial development , this section of the Mole 15 species of dragonfly . The geology of the local area is complex , since the river leaves the chalk of the Mole Gap at this point and flows over gravel and clay , creating a patchwork of different habitats including scrub , woodland , hedges , banks , and meadows as well as the water itself . The river also provides a corridor for wildlife through the centre of Leatherhead . The West End Common forms part of the Esher Commons , owned and managed by Elmbridge Borough Council . The River Mole forms the western boundary of the common , flowing past a steep sandy area known locally as ' ' The Ledges ' ' . Plant species typical of ancient woodland are found in this area , including bluebells ( ' ' Hyacinthoides non-scriptus ' ' ) , Marsh Marigolds ( ' ' Caltha palustris ' ' ) and Golden Saxifrages ( ' ' Chrysosplenium ' ' sp . ) . Large Bittercress ( ' ' Cardamine amara ' ' ) and the non-native Himalayan Balsam ( ' ' Impatiens glandulifera ' ' ) are also found along on the west bank of the Mole , west of the Island Barn Reservoir . The Heath is an area of rough scrubland and , despite its name , is a reclaimed landfill site hence its large but artificial mound and small plateau . The site is a rich habitat for birds including the redshank and Little Ringed Plover. # Angling # Below is a list of the coarse fish records for the river Mole l Barbel - 15 lb 6oz l Roach - 2 lb 5oz l Chub - 6 lb 12oz l Pike - 25 lb 2oz l Carp - 35 lb l Perch - 2 lb 15oz # Geology # # Upper Mole **27;4019;span ( geology ) </span> # The Mole above Dorking drains an area of 340km2 sqmi , of which approximately 60% is on Wealden Clay or Atherfield Clay , 20% is on Tunbridge Wells Sand and 20% is on greensand . Brickearth deposits are common in the valley around Betchworth and east of Dorking . The upper Mole catchment is dominated by a single broad terrace , which runs continuously from the entry to the Meath Green ( near Horley ) , the terrace corresponds to the flood plain of the river , however from this point downstream to Brockham , the river cuts a narrow trench no more than 150m wide . A similar trench is runs up several of the Mole 's tributaries , notably along Deanoak Brook which follows a local strike . The presence of the trench protects the land from flooding rendering it suitable for agriculture . # Mole Gap **27;4048;span ( geology ) </span> # Between Dorking and Leatherhead the Mole cuts a steep-sided valley through the North Downs , creating a 170 m high river cliff on the western flank of Box Hill . The bedrock is permeable chalk and the water table lies permanently below the level of the riverbed , allowing water to drain out of the river through swallow holes in the bed and banks . The amount of water lost from the river is significant and in very hot summers the channel can become dry between Mickleham and Thorncroft Manor ; this was recorded most recently in 1949 and 1976 . At Leatherhead , the . At this point that the water table rises enough for the water to flow back into the main river channel . In a survey in 1958 , the geologist C.C. Fagg identified 25 active swallow holes between Dorking and Mickleham ; most were only a few centimetres in diameter and were located in the vertical banks of the river below the water line . Most holes were difficult to observe in times of normal or heavy flow and were susceptible to silting up as new holes were continually being formed . A few much larger swallow holes were also observed separated from the main river by a channel of about a metre . About six of these larger swallow holes were found to the west of the Burford Bridge Hotel , along the course of the A24 Mickleham Bypass during its construction in 1936 . Initially the surveyors tried to fill the holes with rubble to prevent the foundations of the new road subsiding . However this proved to be impractical and they were instead covered by concrete domes , up to 18 m in diameter , each fully supported access shaft to allow periodic inspection . In the late 1960s the domes were reopened and inspected and the alluvium in the largest swallow hole was observed to have subsided by under the centre of one of the domes . When the Dorking to Leatherhead railway was constructed in 1859 , a fossilised swallow hole was discovered in the cutting at the south end of Box Hill and Westhumble railway station , suggesting that even in its early history , the river had swallow holes . The author Daniel Defoe , who attended school in Dorking and probably grew up in the village of Westhumble , described the swallow holes in the River Mole in his book ' ' A tour thro ' the Whole Island of Great Britain ' ' ( first published in 1724 ) : # . the current of the river being much obstructed by the interposition of those hills , called Box Hill .. it forces the waters as it were to find their way through as well as they can ; and in order to do this , beginning , I say , where the Box-Hill , called the Stomacher , the waters sink insensibly away , and in some places are to be seen ( and I have seen them ) little channels which go out on the sides of the river , where the water in a stream not so big as would fill a pipe of a quarter of an inch diameter , trills away out of the river , and sinks insensibly into the ground . In this manner it goes away , lessening the stream for above a mile , near two , and these they call the Swallows . # Not all of the water removed from the river by the swallow holes is returned to the channel at Leatherhead . The chalk aquifer also feeds the springs at the southern end of Fetcham Mill Pond , which have never been known to run dry . A survey in March 1883 estimated that the Fetcham springs were producing about 3.6 million gallons of water ( 16,000 m <sup> 3 </sup> ) every day . A second survey in 1948 estimated that the same springs were yielding about 5 million gallons day . The water table in the chalk of the Wey Gap is significantly higher than might be expected from natural rainwater percolation alone . It has been suggested that a proportion of the excess water originates from the Mole Gap . # Lower Mole **27;4077;span ( geology ) </span> # At Leatherhead the river leaves the chalk bedrock , moving onto London Clay . The river meanders across an alluvial plain between 400 and 800 m wide towards Cobham , where it begins to descend to a lower flood plain which in turn broadens to the axehead meander at Painshill Park . At the east end of Painshill Park , the lower flood plain abruptly narrows to form a narrow trench about 60 m wide , in which the river runs northwards for 6.5km mi towards Hersham , where the river enters the flood plain of the River Thames . There are a series of gravel deposits laid down by the river above the London Clay between Cobham , Walton-on-Thames and Esher . The depth of the deposits generally varies from 2.5mft sigfig=1 to 7mft sigfig=1 , and the lower iron oxide , whilst the upper layers are loosely packed with angular flints and sand . Remains of a further gravel terrace containing both cherts and flints to a depth of 4mft sigfig=2 are located along the side of St George 's Hill . # History # # Etymology # The river is first recorded in the ' ' Red Book of Thorney ' ' in AD 983 as ' ' Emen ' ' and in the AD 1005 ' ' Cartulary of the Abbey of Eynsham ' ' as both ' ' Emen ' ' and ' ' men ' ' . Variations in the name are recorded throughout the Middle Ages and the river appears as ' ' Amele ' ' in Domesday Book and subsequently as ' ' Emele ' ' in 12th and 13th century Court Rolls . This name is probably derived from the Old English word ' ' men ' ' meaning ' ' misty ' ' or ' ' causing mists ' ' , and the name of the River Ember probably has its origins in this name . **16;4106;ref The prefix of the referred to as Emley Bridge in some 19th century records , probably also has its origins in the Old English word ' ' men ' ' . The name ' ' Mole ' ' does not appear until the 16th century , first occurring as ' ' Moule ' ' in Harrison 's ' ' Description of Britain ' ' of 1577 . The antiquarian William Camden uses the Latinized form ' ' Molis ' ' in the 1586 edition of ' ' Britannia ' ' and Michael Drayton is the first to use ' ' Mole ' ' in his poem ' ' Poly-Olbion ' ' published in 1613 . In John Speed 's 1611 map of Surrey this stretch of the river is denoted by a series of hills accompanied by the legend The river runneth under . However the river 's name is unlikely to have derived from this behaviour : The ' ' Oxford Dictionary of English Place Names ' ' suggests that ' ' Mole ' ' either comes from the Latin ' ' mola ' ' ( a mill ) or is a back-formation from . In John Rocque 's 1768 map of Surrey , the name ' ' Moulsey River ' ' is used . # Archaeology # In common with much of the rest of the Weald , the earliest evidence of human settlement along the Upper Mole is from the Mesolithic Period ( 20 000 - 7000 BC ) . Mesolithic sites at Wonham , Flanchford and Sidlow . Finds at Wonham include arrowheads and a plano-convex knife . The Lower Mole appears to have been settled during the same period and a flint axe dating from Mesolithic period found on spit of land close to River Mole in Cobham in 1965 . Remains of a flat-bottomed dug-out canoe were found at the confluence of the Mole and Thames in 1877 by a local boatman . The canoe is preserved at the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford . The Mole Gap and North Downs do not appear to have been settled until the late Stone Age : A large axe , typical of a rough-out axe produced during the Neolithic period , which was discovered in 1952 during building work in Westhumble , at East Horsley along with neolithic flakes of flint at Fetcham and Headley Heath . Significant Bronze Age finds include a bronze sword found close to the river north of Amberley Farm near Charlwood and a small hoard of weaponry consisting of two palstave axes and a scabbard chape was discovered in 2003 in Norbury Park close to Ham Bank . # Navigation # It is not clear to what extent the Mole was used for navigation in the past : In the late 13th century , Thorncroft Manor ( south of Leatherhead ) purchased a ' ' shout ' ' , a type of boat up to 16 m in length used to carry produce to market and it has been suggested that stone cut from quarries in Reigate was transported to London via the river . During the 17th century , two bills came before parliament to make sections of the river navigable . The first , in 1663 , was passed by the House of Commons but was defeated in the House of Lords . During the following year ( 1664 ) , an act was passed by from Reigate to the River Thames , but was never executed . The only Surrey river to have been made fully navigable is the River Wey . In 1798 William Marshall advocated the canalisation of a short stretch of the River Mole between Betchworth and Dorking to facilitate the movement of chalk from quarry to market . In 1810 the engineer John Rennie proposed a canal linking the River Medway to Portsmouth which was to have a branch to London following the Mole for much of its length . Between 1825 and 1828 the architect and civil engineer Nicholas Wilcox Cundy proposed a Grand Imperial Ship Canal from Deptford to Chichester passing through the Mole Gap , however he was unable to attract sufficient financial interest in his scheme . Today the Mole is navigable for the 400 m from the confluence with the River Thames to Molember Weir at East Molesey where there is a private mooring facility . The river may be paddled all year by canoe between Brockham and Fetcham with an appropriate licence from the British Canoe Union . # World War II defences # During the Mole were fortified for the defence of London against invasion from the south . GHQ Line B ran along the North Downs from Farnham and Guildford , crossing the Mole Gap to the north of Dorking and following the river to Horley . Between Betchworth and Box Hill , the north bank of the River Mole was stabilised and made steeper to prevent wheeled vehicles from crossing . At Boxhill Farm , where access to the river from the north bank was required for the herd of dairy cows , a row of twelve concrete cylinders were cast as an anti-tank measure . Gun mounts were also installed to protect both Boxhill and Deepdene bridges and several pillboxes were installed . An anti-tank ditch was dug from the Stepping Stones eastwards across the fields belonging to Bradley Farm ( now Denbies vineyard ) . The river crossing at Sidlow Bridge was heavily defended and a line of pill boxes was constructed on the north bank of the river . Concrete anti-tank dragon 's teeth were built on both sides of the river , a short distance upstream of the bridge , the Mole # # Mole Gap # The North Downs Way crosses the river at Box Hill via seventeen hexagonal stepping stones , which are frequently submerged after heavy rainfall . The current stones were dedicated in September 1946 by the then Prime Minister Clement Attlee , replacing those destroyed during WW2 as an anti-invasion measure . The location is popular both with anglers and families , although swimming is strongly discouraged as the water is polluted in places . The stones give their name to the pub in the nearby village of Westhumble . When the Burford Bridge was rebuilt in 1937 , excavations revealed a flint-surfaced approach to a ford at low level having all the signs of Roman workmanship suggesting that Stane Street ( which ran from London to Chichester via Dorking ) crossed the river at this point . In Defoe 's time , there was a footbridge at this point , but carts and waggons had to cross the river by a ford . # Leatherhead # There are three listed bridges in Leatherhead of which the 14 arch Leatherhead Town Bridge is the oldest . the late Middle Ages and was rebuilt and enlarged by the county surveyor George Gwilt in 1782-83 . The bridge is a long structure of 14 segmental arches resting on low piers , finished in red brick in Flemish bond , with some Portland stone dressing . A few metres downstream of Leatherhead Bridge stands the Grade II listed railway viaduct which carries the Leatherhead to Dorking line over the river . The bridge was constructed in 1867 and , at the insistence of Thomas Grissell the landowner , was given lavish architectural treatment . The single span Shell Bridge stands in the grounds of Thorncroft Manor , to the south of the Town Centre . The bridge was constructed as an ornamental feature in parkland laid out by Capability Brown in the late 18th century . The bridge is largely composed of flint and has a large inverted scallop shell in the place of the keystone and similar shells in the spandrels at each side . The bridge was renovated and strengthened in 1999 by a group of Canadian engineers working on the Terra Nove project . The restoration project who were billeted in the Manor during the second world war . # Cobham # A wooden bridge is thought to have existed on the site of Cobham Bridge since the twelfth century , the upkeep of which was the responsibility of the adjacent landowners . The present bridge was constructed by George Gwilt in 1792 , after responsibility for maintenance had been transferred to the County Council by Act of Parliament . The bridge has nine low arches and is primarily built of red brick with stone coping . The parapets were rebuilt in 1914 and the structure was given a Grade II listing in 1953. # Watermills # Domesday Book listed twenty mills on the River Mole in 1086. # Upper Mole # Horley Mill was first mentioned in a deed of the early thirteenth century . The most recent mill was demolished in 1959 , although the mill house still stands . The first mill at Sidlow was built during Saxon times . The final mill on the site was demolished in 1790 , however remains of the mill leat are still visible . Mention is made of mill race are still visible . # Lower Mole # Slyfield Mill near Stoke d'Abernon is first mentioned in Domesday Book . It was used for fulling woollen cloth and milling corn . Five of the mills mentioned in Domesday Book were in the borough of Elmbridge . Downside Mill , Cobham was the mill of the manor of Downe . Until the Dissolution of the Monasteries it was owned by Chertsey Abbey . It has been used for many purposes including the processing of corn , paper , iron , tinplate and flock and the generation of electricity . The present building dates from the 18th century but it is inaccessible to the public . Cobham Mill , downstream of Leatherhead , consisted of two mills used for grinding corn . In 1953 the larger mill was demolished by Surrey County Council to allieviate traffic congestion on Mill Road . The remaining red brick mill dates from the 1822 and was in use until 1928 . It was restored to full working order by the Cobham Mill Preservation Trust , and is now open to the public from 2 pm ( between April and October ) . Esher Mill was at the end of Lower Green Road where there is now an industrial estate . It was used to process corn , brass wire , iron , paper , linoleum , and books . For many years there may have been two mills on the site for corn grinding and industrial use . There were a series of fires over a century and after the last in 1978 the buildings were demolished . East Molesey Upper Mill was associated with the manor of Molesey Matham . It was used to produce gunpowder from the time of the Commonwealth until about 1780 . The island where it stood now forms part of the ornamental gardens of a housing development called The Wilderness . East Molesey Lower Mill , also known as Sterte Mill , was associated with the manor of Molesey Prior . During the Commonwealth it was used for gunpowder manufacture , but after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 it reverted to corn milling . An old timber structure was replaced by a brick building in the 1820s which Hampton Court Way . In addition there was Ember Mill , which stood on the banks of the old course of the River Ember near Hampton Court Way . # River Ember Flood Relief Channel and confluence with the Thames # The River Mole originally flowed into the River Thames at the point where the present Hampton Court bridge now crosses the Thames ( approximately 500 m upstream of the present confluence , on the reach above Teddington Lock ) . However , during the early 1930s , when Hampton Court Way and the bridge were built , the River Mole was redirected to flow into the River Ember and both rivers now enter the Thames in a single widened and straightened channel once occupied only by the River Ember . There have been further alterations to the courses of these two rivers in a major flood prevention scheme since serious flooding in the area in 1947 and 1968. # Literature # The river has captured the imagination of several authors and poets , particularly since in very hot summers the river channel can become dry between Dorking and Leatherhead ( ' The Faerie Queene ' ' ( first published in 1590 ) Edmund Spenser wrote of the river : # : And Mole , that like a nousling mole doth make : His way still under ground till Thamis he overtake . # In ' ' Poly-Olbion ' ' ( first published in 1612 ) the poet Michael Drayton described the journey taken by the River Thames to the sea : # : As still his goodly traine yet every houre increast , : And from the ' ' Surrian ' ' shores cleer ' ' Wey ' ' came down to meet : His Greatnes , whom the ' ' Tames ' ' so gratiously doth greet : That with the Fearne-crown 'd Flood he Minion-like doth play : : Yet is not this the Brook , entiseth him to stay . : But as they thus , in pompe , came sporting on the shole , : Gainst ' ' Hampton-Court ' ' he meets the soft and gentle ' ' Mole ' ' . : Whose eyes so pierc't his breast , that seeming to foreslowe : The : With trifling up and down , he wandreth here and there ; : And that he in her sight , transparent might appeare , : Applyes himselfe to Fords , and setteth his delight , : On that which might make him gratious in her sight . : But ' ' Tames ' ' would hardly on : oft turning back to show , : For his much loved ' ' Mole ' ' how loth he was to go . : The mother of the ' ' Mole ' ' , old ' ' Holmsdale ' ' , likewise beares : Th'affection of her childe , as ill as they do theirs : : But ' ' Mole ' ' respects her words , as vaine and idle dreames , : Compar 'd with that high joy , to be belov 'd of ' ' Tames : ' ' : And head-long holds her course , his company to win . : ' ' Mole ' ' digs her selfe a path , by working day and night : ( According to her name , to shew her nature miles space doth creep : : Till gotten out of sight , quite from her mothers keep , : Her foreintended course the wanton Nymph doth run ; : As longing to imbrace old ' ' Tame ' ' and ' ' Isis ' ' son .. # He writes in the appendix to Song XVII # This ' ' Mole ' ' runnes into the earth , about a mile from ' ' Darking ' ' in ' ' Surrey ' ' , and after some two miles sees the light againe , which to be certaine hath been affirmed by Inhabitants thereabout reporting triall made of it . # John Milton ( c. 15621647 ) described the river as # : sullen Mole that runneth underneath # In a similar vein , Alexander Pope ( 16881744 ) wrote in his poem ' ' Windsor Forest ' ' ( first published 1713 ) # : And sullen Mole that hides his diving flood # Robert Bloomfield ( 17661823 ) writes the following lines about the Mole Valley in his 1806 poem ' ' Wild Flowers ' ' . # : Thy balm that softens human ills ; : Come on the long drawn clouds that fling : Their shadows o'er the Surry-Hills . : Yon green-topt hills , and far away : Where late as now I freedom stole , : And spent one dear delicious day : On thy wild banks romantic Mole . : Ay there 's the scene ! Beyond the sweep : Of London 's congregated cloud , : The dark-brow 'd wood , the headlong steep , : And valley paths without a crowd ! : Here Thames I watch thy flowing tides , : Thy thousand sails am proud to see ; : But where the Mole all silent glides : Dwells Peace - and Peace is wealth to me . # Extract from ' ' The River Mole or Emlyn Stream ' ' by Mary Uniacke ( writing under her maiden name Mary Drinkwater-Bethune ) , which was published in 1839 . # : Who may count back that forgotten time : When first the waters forced an outlet here : : When the foundations of these stedfast hills : Were shaken , and ? That awful day : Yet leaves its trace . The waters find their way , : Now laughing in the sun - now swallowed up : In caverns pervious to their course alone , : They leave their channel dry , and hide awhile : Their silent flow ; like bitter tears , unshed : From the dim eye , before a careless world : Unheeding of our grief ; but swelling still : In the full heart , which leaves unsoothed , unseen , : And broods o'er ruined hopes , and days gone by . # # Tributaries # The major tributaries of the River Mole are the Ifield Brook , Gatwick Stream , Earlswood Brook , Pipp Brook and The Rye , which drains Ashtead . A full list of the tributaries is given in the table below . # Distributary # *River Ember 
 ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' is a ballad opera in three acts written in 1728 by John Gay with music arranged by Johann Christoph Pepusch . It is one of the watershed plays in Augustan drama and is the only example of the once thriving genre of satirical ballad opera to remain popular today . Ballad operas were satiric musical plays that used some of the conventions of opera , but without recitative . The lyrics of the airs in the piece are set to popular broadsheet ballads , opera arias , church hymns and folk tunes of the time . ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' premiered at the Lincoln 's Inn Fields Theatre on 29 January 1728 and ran for 62 consecutive performances , the longest run in theatre history up to that time ( after 146 performances of Rober Cambert 's Pomone in 1671 ) . The work became Gay 's greatest success and has been played ever since . In 1920 , ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' began an astonishing revival run of 1,463 performances at one of the longest runs in history for any piece of musical theatre at that time . The piece satirised Italian opera , which had become popular in London . According to ' ' The New York Times ' ' : Gay wrote the work more as an anti-opera than an opera , one of its attractions to its 18th-century London public being its lampooning of the Italian opera style and the English public 's fascination with it . Instead of the grand music and themes of opera , the work uses familiar tunes and characters that were ordinary people . Some of the songs were by opera composers like Handel , but only the most popular of these were used . The audience could hum along with the music and identify with the characters . The story satirised politics , poverty and injustice , focusing on the theme of corruption at all levels of society . Lavinia Fenton , the first Polly Peachum , became an overnight success . Her pictures were in great demand , verses were written to her and books published about her . After appearing in ' The Beggars Opera ' ' , she ran away with her married lover , Charles Powlett , 3rd Duke of Bolton . Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill adapted the opera into ' ' Die Dreigroschenoper ' ' ( ' ' The Threepenny Opera ' ' ) in 1928 , sticking close to the original plot and characters but with a new libretto and mostly new music . # Origin and analysis # The original idea of the opera came from Jonathan Swift , who wrote to Alexander Pope on 30 August 1716 asking ... what think you , of a Newgate pastoral among the thieves and whores there ? Their friend , Gay , decided that it would be a satire rather than a pastoral opera . For his original production in 1728 , Gay intended all the songs to be sung without any accompaniment , adding to the shocking and gritty atmosphere of his conception . However , a week or so before the opening night , John Rich , the theatre director , insisted on having Johann Christoph Pepusch , a composer associated with his theatre , write songs in the opera , including a fugue based on Lucy 's 3rd act song I 'm Like A Skiff on the Ocean Toss 'd ) and also to arrange the 69 songs . Although there is no external evidence of who the arranger was , inspection of the original 1729 score , formally published by Dover Books , demonstrates that Pepusch was the arranger . The work took satiric aim at the passionate interest of the upper classes in Italian opera , and simultaneously set out to lampoon the notable British Whig Party Gay used Scottish folk melodies mostly taken from the poet Allan Ramsay 's hugely popular collection ' ' The Gentle Shepherd ' ' ( 1725 ) plus two French tunes ( including the carol ' Bergers , Ecoutez La Musique ! ' for his song ' Fill Every Glass ' ) , to serve his hilariously pointed and irreverent texts . The renowned composer , John Christopher Pepusch , composed an Ouverture and arranged all the tunes shortly before the opening night at Lincoln 's Inn Fields on 28 January 1728 . However , all that remains instrumentation ) and the melodies of the songs with unfigured basses . Various reconstructions have been attempted , and a 1990 reconstruction of the score by American composer Jonathan Dobin has been used in a number of modern productions . Gay uses the operatic norm of three acts ( as opposed to the standard in spoken drama of the time of five acts ) , and tightly controls the dialogue and plot so that there are surprises in each of the forty-five fast-paced scenes and 69 short songs . The success of the opera was accompanied by a public desire for keepsakes and mementos , ranging from images of Polly on fans and clothing , playing cards and fire-screens , broadsides featuring all the characters , and the rapidly published musical score of the opera . The play is sometimes seen to be a reactionary call for libertarian values in response to the growing power of the conservative Whig party . It may also have been influenced by the then-popular ideology of Locke that men should be allowed their natural liberties ; these democratic strains of thought influenced the populist movements 's Opera ' ' was a part . The character of Macheath has been considered by critics as both a hero and an anti-hero . Harold Gene Moss , arguing that Macheath is a noble character , has written , one whose drives are toward love and the vital passions , Macheath becomes an almost Christ-like victim of the decadence surrounding him . Contrarily , John Richardson in the peer-reviewed journal ' ' Eighteenth-Century Life ' ' has argued that Macheath is powerful as a literary figure precisely because he stands against any interpretation , against expectation and illusion . ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' has had an influence on all later British stage comedies , especially on nineteenth century British comic opera and the modern musical . # Adaptations # As was typical practice of the time in London , a commemorative score of the entire opera was assembled and published quickly . As was common , this consisted of the fully arranged overture followed by the melodies of the 69 songs , supported by only the simplest bass accompaniments . There are no indications of dance in three instances : Lucy 's Is Then His Fate Decree 'd Sir one measure of descending scale marked Viol . ; Trape 's In the Days of My Youth , in which the fa la la chorus is written as viol. ; and the final reprieve dance , Macheath 's Thus I Stand Like A Turk , which includes two sections of 16 measures of dance marked viol . ( See the 1729 score , formerly published by Dover ) . The absence of the original performing parts has allowed producers and arrangers free rein . The tradition of personalised arrangements , dating back at least as far as Thomas Arne 's later 18th century arrangements , continues today , running the gamut of musical styles from Romantic to Baroque : Austin , Britten , Sargent , Bonynge , Dobin and other conductors have each imbued the songs with a personal stamp , highlighting different aspects of characterisation . Following is a list of some of the most highly regarded 20th-century arrangements and settings of the opera . * In 1920 , the baritone Frederic Austin newly arranged the music the long-running production ( 1,463 performances ) at the Lyric Theatre , Hammersmith . The Irish baritone Frederick Ranalow sang the role of Captain Macheath in every performance . In 1955 this version was recorded by conductor Sir Malcolm Sargent with John Cameron as Macheath and Monica Sinclair as Lucy . * In 1928 , on the 200th anniversary of the original production , Bertolt Brecht ( words ) and Kurt Weill ( music ) created a popular new musical adaptation of the work in Germany entitled ' ' Die Dreigroschenoper ' ' ( ' ' The Threepenny Opera ' ' ) . In this work , the original plot is followed fairly closely ( although the time is brought forward over a hundred years ) but the music is almost all new . * In 1946 , John La Touche ( book and lyrics ) and Duke Ellington ( music ) created another musical adaptation of the work for Broadway entitled ' ' Beggar 's Holiday ' ' . An updated rendition of the story focused on a corrupt world inhabited by rakish Mobsters , raffish Madams and their dissolute , Benjamin Britten created an adaptation with new harmonisations and arrangements of pre-existing tunes . Additional dialogue was written by the producer , Tyrone Guthrie . Peter Pears was the first singer of Macheath. * The opera was made into a film version in 1953 , and starred Laurence Olivier as Captain Macheath. * In 1975 , Czech playwright ( and future president ) Vclav Havel created a non-musical adaptation . * In 1977 , the Nigerian Nobel Prize-winning playwright and dramatist Wole Soyinka wrote , produced and directed ' ' Opera Wonyosi ' ' ( publ. 1981 ) , an adaptation of both John Gay 's ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' and Bertolt Brecht 's ' ' The Threepenny Opera ' ' ; most of his characters as well as some of the arias are from the two earlier plays . * In 1981 Richard Bonynge and Douglas Gamley arranged a new edition for The Australian Opera ( now Opera Australia ) . It was recorded the same year with Joan Sutherland , Kiri Te Kanawa , James Morris and Angela Lansbury. * The opera was adapted by Jonathan Miller and starred Roger Daltrey in the role of Macheath , Stratford Johns as Peachum , Gary Tibbs as Filch , and Bob Hoskins as the Beggar . The happy ending was changed so that Macheath is hanged instead of being reprieved. * In 1984 in the play ( and later film ) ' ' A Chorus of Disapproval ' ' by Alan Ayckbourn , an amateur production of ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' is a major plot driver and excerpts are performed . * In 1986 in the Brazilian musical film ' ' pera do Malandro ' ' ( American title ' ' Malandro ' ' ) , by Ruy Guerra ( director ) and Chico Buarque ( writer and composer ) . * In 1990 created his period-styled performing edition for the ( now ' ' Theatre 2020 ' ' ) and it has since been performed at a venues throughout the United States . This edition is based on the 1728 printed edition and includes the full overture as detailed by Pepusch and fleshes out all of the remaining 69 airs and dances was ' ' David Dunn Bauer ' ' , Music Director , ' ' N. Thomas Pedersen ' ' , and Choreographer , ' ' Alan Tjaarda Jones ' ' . * In 1998 , the all female Japanese troupe , Takarazuka Revue , produced an adaptation titled ' ' Speakeasy ' ' . The play was Maya Miki 's retirement play . * In 2008 the Sydney Theatre Company of Australia and Out of Joint Theatre Company co-produced a version entitled ' ' The Convict 's Opera ' ' written by Stephen Jeffreys and directed by Max Stafford-Clark . This version is set aboard a convict ship bound for New South Wales , where convicts are putting on a version of ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' . The lives of the convicts partly mirror their characters in ' ' The Beggars ' Opera ' ' , and modern popular songs are performed throughout the piece . ' ' The Convict 's Opera ' ' began touring the UK in early 2009. * Vanishing Point created a modern production of The Beggar 's Opera in 2009 for The in a near-future apocalypse world . It features music from A Band Called Quinn . * The original opera was performed in an 18th-century setting at the Open Air Theatre , Regent 's Park in summer 2011 , in a production directed by Lucy Bailey . * Currently , in 2014 , Kneehigh Theatre will be performing an adaptation entitled ' Dead Dog in a Suitcase ( and other love songs ) ' . This version uses an original score , with a wide array of musical styles . # Roles # style= border-collapse : collapse jailor drawer constables # Synopsis # Peachum , a fence and thief-catcher , justifies his actions . Mrs. Peachum , overhearing her husband 's blacklisting of unproductive thieves , protests regarding one of them , Bob Booty ( the nickname of Robert Walpole ) . The Peachums discover that Polly , their daughter , has secretly married Macheath , the famous highwayman , who is Peachum 's principal client . Upset to find out that he will no longer be able to use Polly in his business , Peachum and his wife ask how Polly Whoring . Nevertheless , they conclude that the match may make sense if the husband can be killed for his money . They leave to carry out this errand . However , Polly has hidden Macheath . Macheath goes to a tavern where he is surrounded by women of dubious virtue who , despite their class , compete in displaying perfect drawing-room manners , although the subject of their conversation is their success in picking pockets and shoplifting . Macheath discovers , too late , that two of them ( Jenny Diver , Suky Tawdry ) have contracted with Peachum to capture him , and he becomes a prisoner in Newgate prison . The prison is run by Peachum 's associate , the corrupt jailer Lockit . His daughter , Lucy Lockit , has the opportunity to scold Macheath for having agreed to marry her and then broken this promise . She tells him that to see him tortured would give her pleasure . Macheath pacifies her , but Polly arrives and claims him as her husband . Macheath tells Lucy that Polly is crazy . Lucy helps Macheath to escape of Macheath 's promise to marry her and worries that if Macheath is recaptured and hanged , his fortune might be subject to Peachum 's claims . Lockit and Peachum discover Macheath 's hiding place . They decide to split his fortune . Meanwhile , Polly visits Lucy to try to reach an agreement , but Lucy tries to poison her . Polly narrowly avoids the poisoned drink , and the two girls find out that Macheath has been recaptured owing to the inebriated Mrs Diana Trapes . They plead with their fathers for Macheath 's life . However , Macheath now finds that four more pregnant women each claim him as their husband . He declares that he is ready to be hanged . The narrator ( the Beggar ) , notes that although in a properly moral ending Macheath and the other villains would be hanged , the audience demands a happy ending , and so Macheath is reprieved , and all are invited to a dance of celebration , to celebrate his wedding to Polly . # Selected musical numbers # * Can Love Be Controlled By Advice Road ( Chorus of Highwaymen ) * When Gold Is at Hand ( Jenny Diver ) * At The Tree I Shall Suffer ( Macheath ) * How Cruel Are The Traitors ( Lucy ) * How Happy Could I Be With Either ( Macheath ) * In The Days of My Youth ( Mrs Diana Trapes ) * The Charge Is Prepared ( Macheath ) # Reaction # ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' was met with widely varying reactions . Its popularity was documented in ' ' The Craftsmen ' ' with the following entries : This Week a Dramatick Entertainment has been exhibited at the Theatre in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields , entitled The Beggar 's Opera , which has met with a general Applause , insomuch that the Waggs say it has made Rich very Gay , and probably will make Gay very Rich . ( 3 February 1728 ) We hear that the British Opera , commonly called The Beggar 's Opera , continues to be acted , at the Theatre in Lincoln's-Inn Fields with general Applause , to the great Mortification of the Performers and Admirers February 1728 ) Two weeks after opening night , an article appeared in ' ' The Craftsman ' ' , the leading opposition newspaper , ostensibly protesting at Gay 's work as libellous and ironically assisting him in satirising the Walpole establishment by taking the government 's side : : It will , I know , be said , by these libertine Stage-Players , that the Satire is general ; and that it discovers a Consciousness of Guilt for any particular Man to apply it to Himself . But they seem to forget that there are such things as Innuendo 's ( a never-failing Method of explaining Libels ) Nay the very Title of this Piece and the principal Character , which is that of a Highwayman , sufficiently discover the mischievous Design of it ; since by this Character every Body will understand One , who makes it his Business arbitrarily to levy and collect Money on the People for his own Use , and of which he always dreads to give an Account Is not this squinting with a vengeance , and wounding Persons in Authority through the Sides 's last remark : That the lower People have their Vices in a Degree as well as the Rich , and are punished for them , implying that rich People are not so punished . Criticism of Gay 's opera continued long after its publication . In 1776 , John Hawkins wrote in his History of Music that due to the opera 's popularity , Rapine and violence have been gradually increasing solely because the rising generation of young men desired to imitate the character Macheath . Hawkins blamed Gay for tempting these men with the charms of idleness and criminal pleasure , which Hawkins saw Macheath as representing and glorifying. # Sequel # In 1729 , Gay wrote a sequel , ' ' Polly ' ' , set in the West Indies : Macheath , sentenced to transportation , has escaped and become a pirate , while Mrs Trapes has set up in white-slaving and shanghais Polly to sell her to the wealthy planter Mr Ducat . Polly escapes dressed as a boy , and after many adventures marries the son of a Carib chief . The political satire , ' ' than in ' ' The Beggar 's Opera ' ' , with the result that Prime Minister Robert Walpole leaned on the Lord Chamberlain to have it banned , and it was not performed until fifty years later . 
 RLM may refer to : * RLM , a wholly owned subsidiary of the Lockheed Martin Corporation , with significant presence in the Australian defence industry * Real Life Ministries , a non-denominational Evangelical Christian church in Idaho * ' ' R eichs l uftfahrt m inisterium ' ' , the Ministry of Aviation ( Germany ) ( 193345 ) * Right-to-left mark , writing-direction control character * Red Letter Media , an American film-production house that has achieved moderate fame for their ' Plinkett Reviews ' * Reprise license manager , a software-licensing system * In statistics , a robust linear model 
 birthplace = Dakar , Senegal genre = French hip hop , jazz-rap Claude M'Barali better known by his stage name MC Solaar ( ( born March 5 , 1969 ) is a Francophone hip hop and rap artist . He is one of France 's most internationally popular and influential hip hop artists . MC Solaar is known for his complex lyrics , which rely on word play , lyricism , and inquiry . In the English-speaking world , Solaar was signed by London acid jazz label Talkin ' Loud and recorded with British group Urban Species and the late Guru , member of the acclaimed New York duo Gang Starr . He has since released seven studio records and one live album . # Biography # # Early life and debut # Claude M'Barali was born in Dakar , Senegal to parents from Chad . When he was six months old , due to the political troubles in Senegal , his parents emigrated to France where they settled in the Parisian suburbs ; initially in Saint-Denis , subsequently Maisons-Alfort and finally Villeneuve-Saint-Georges . At twelve he went nine months where he discovered the Zulu Nation and became fascinated with the rapping styles of Afrika Bambaataa . Upon his return he passed the baccalaurat . It has been said that his constant support from his mother was one of the reasons that he was able to pass the baccalaurat and still create music . He coined the stage name MC Solaar in his teens from his graffiti tags SOAR and SOLAAR . He studied languages at the Jussieu university campus and was a post-graduate in philosophy . He released his first single in 1990 . MC Solaar went to Paris in the summer of 1991 with his friend Jimmy Jay in hopes of succeeding in the music industry . Success came quickly when his first single , ' ' Bouge de l ' ' ( Get Out of My Way ) , based on a sample from Cymande 's song ' ' The Message ' ' ( 1973 ) became a hit in early 1990s . This song was all about brushing people to the side and not having time for them ; this is evident in the lyrics ) : # I went straight over to Lucie 's She loves dogs , cats and 30 Millions d'Amis She says ' Do you like animals , my super MC ? ' I said ' Yeah , I love them , well cooked and salted ' She said ' Get out my way ' . # 30 Millions d'Amis is a French charity for the protection of animals , with its own eponymous TV show . The lyric may refer to either . Many rappers who came out of Africa at the time spoke a lot about slavery and other topics in order to bring the history of their people into light . Nevertheless , the song went platinum in France and ascended to number five on the national charts . # 19911997 : Early success and ' ' Prose Combat ' ' breakthrough # After the success of ' ' Bouge de l ' ' , Solaar went on to support the famous American rap group De La Soul when they performed at the Olympia in Paris in September 1991 . At the close of 1991 Solaar released ' ' went on to sell over 400,000 copies in France . With the success of his dbut album in France , the French rapper embarked upon extensive tours of Poland and Russia . In December 1992 he performed in twelve countries in West Africa , where his French rap style proved extremely popular with African music fans . MC Solaar returned to the studio in 1994 , recording the album ' ' Prose Combat ' ' . It sold 100,000 copies in the first week of its release and became a bestseller in 20 other countries . He was rewarded for his efforts when in February 1995 he received an award for Best Male Singer of the Year at the 10th edition of the French Victoires de la Musique awards . Also in 1994 , MC Solaar appeared on the Red Hot Organization 's compilation album , ' ' Stolen Moments : Red Hot + Cool ' ' . The album , meant to raise awareness and funds in support of the AIDS epidemic in relation to the African American community , was heralded as Album of the Year by ' ' in 1997 with longtime friend and producer Jimmy Jay to record his third album , ' ' Paradisiaque ' ' . The album was another success , which led to an extensive European tour starting on 9 January 1998 at the Znith in Paris . His talents led to international interest from places such as Germany in Europe and all the way to Japan and the United States not long after . He was even included as a guest on American rapper Guru 's Jazzmatazz project and one of his songs was included in the Tommy Boy rap compilation in the States . Early on in MC Solaar 's career it was important for him to share the struggles and the different hardships for Black people that migrated to France and tried to make a living . Most of his music was dedicated to enlightening the population of a specific deeper message that connected to him in his life . ... he addresses the conditions under which Black people have migrated to and settled in France . In the piece ' Leve-toi et rap , ' he describes his Chadian parents main stages of his teenage years and how he finally came to discover rap . In an interview MC Solaar described the feeling of making a song and the thought process while just writing any part of lyrics that go into his music . I write quickly , because of the music , he tells me . Its much easier if you have the music , the rhythm , but I am fast . First , I have taken in everything . Do you never write before the music ? Ah . I used to , he admits . But when I met the music , I changed . # 19972003 : ' ' Cinquime As ' ' and ' ' Mach 6 ' ' # Solaar 's career continued to evolve throughout the late nineties and into the new millennium . He released ' ' Cinquime As ' ' in 2001 to critical acclaim and ' ' Mach 6 ' ' in 2003 . In the album 's third track , Lve-Toi et Rap , Solaar describes his parents ' Chadian emigration as well as his own roots growing up song he says : ' ' Puis trip en Egypte , Ecole Franaise du Caire/ Pour parfaire mon flow et mon vocabulaire/ L j'ai appris l'humilit , la peur des cartouches/ Pur style de sniper camouflage paw-mouche ' ' , which , translated , roughly means he spent time at a French school in Cairo , perfecting his rapping style and learning how to survive a dangerous lifestyle . Critic Dan Gennoe attests to Solaar 's flow et vocabulaire by noting the flow of his words is staggering , as are the low-slung grooves that they roll to ; deftly vaulting all language barriers . The cover of ' ' Cinquieme As ' ' depicts Solaar topless , and draws comparisons to captives about to be taken onto a slave ship . However , a look at the inside cover reveals Solaar to be in a wrestler 's costume , along with the other men in the picture . As Veronique Helenon discusses in her article concerning the French hip hop scene , references to Africa and blackness are a very important part of Solaar 's music . Solaar recognizes and boxing and wrestling references . Senegalese boxer Battling Siki is referenced in the album 's booklet . Although Siki won the light heavyweight boxing championship in 1922 , he still faced racism from journalists . This image combined with songs concerning colonial oppression and the migration experience from Africa to France show Solaar 's blackness , something that is extremely important in France 's hip hop scene . For example , in his song ' Les Colonies ' , Solaar discusses the similarities between the oppression of Africans by colonialists to the modern day exploitation of third world countries . Cinquime As includes lyrics in French , English , and Spanish , which represents his ideals that rap should be inclusive of all people . # 2004Present : ' ' Chapitre 7 ' ' and international acclaim # Da Vinci Claude , the first single from Solaar 's album ' ' Chapitre 7 ' ' , was launched in March 2007 . The album was released 18 June 2007 . In early 2004 , his 2001 song La Belle et Le Bad Boy was featured on the final episode of the ' . The MTV series The Hills featured the song as well . MC Solaar is best known outside of France for his work on Guru 's ' ' Jazzmatazz ' ' project and as a guest rapper on the Missy Elliott track All N My Grill . Collaboration with Elliot propelled him to higher popularity in the American market . The single Le Bien , Le Mal ( The Good , The Bad ) has been a Hip Hop/Dance crossover hit and has received playtime on MTV , which characterizes his work this way : His fluid phrasing makes up for his lack of English , and the production on his solo work ( by DJ Jimmy Jay and Boom Bass of La Funk Mob ) surpasses that of most of his hip-hop contemporaries . MC Solaar is one of the few French rappers having success in the English-dominated American hip hop culture . MC Solaar has released a few songs which never appeared on albums , including Comme dans un film ( falsely known as John Woo ) and Inch'Allah . He has criticized people for illegal downloading and ' ' and ' ' Chapitre 7 ' ' . # Personal life # On 7 December 2003 , MC Solaar married Chlo Bensemoun and on 7 May 2004 she gave birth to the couple 's first child , Roman . In 2007 , she gave birth to a girl named Bonnie . # Discography # # Albums # ; Studio albums ; Live albums ; Compilation albums # Maxis and EPs # * ' ' Obsolte ' ' ( maxi ) * ' ' Solaar Power EP ' ' * ' ' Inch'Allah EP ' ' # Singles # <small> *Did not appear in the official Belgian Ultratop 50 charts , but rather in the bubbling under Ultratip charts . </small> ; Collective singles ; Featured in ; Participations &amp; indits *Il apparait dans l ' mission 24h sur Canal+ , avec Public Enemy , o on peut le voir faire un rap dans le RER. *Premire prestation tlvisuelle avec la chanson Bouge de l dans l ' mission Baby-Lone sur La Cinq *Et Dieu cra l'homme - Compilation de Jimmy Jay Les Cools Sessions *Le bien , le mal *Le syndrome de Stockholm - Maxi de MC Solaar Obsolte avec Bambi Cruz ( qui fut un de ses danseurs ) *Zig zag de l'ais - Maxi de MC Solaar La Concubine De L'Hmoglobine *Represent - Maxi de MC Solaar La Concubine De L'Hmoglobine avec Black Jack , Carlos ( Sens Unik ) , Mello Philo ( Sages Po ' ) &amp; Willy Roots *Comme dans un film - BO du film La Haine *Le repas - Album de Sens Unik Chromatic avec Sens Unik *Listen - Album de Urban Species Listen avec Urban Species *Solaar power - Maxi de MC Solaar Solaar Power E.P . et version anglaise de Prose Combat *I 'm doin ' fine - Maxi de MC Solaar Solaar Power E.P . et version anglaise de Prose Combat avec The Roots *8 mesures pour 12 types - Album de Bambi Cruz Ouvre Les Yeux avec Puzzle , 9 Respect , Bambi Cruz , Driver , Kaysha , Rootsneg ' ... *All n my grill ( European mix ) - Album ( version europenne ) de Missy Elliott Da Real World avec Missy Elliott * Jallbd - Album Marina Fazel *Le flow Beretta - Indit *Communication - Album de Vocal Rendezvous de Al Di Meola avec Beverly Knight ( 2006 ) *Insparables - Album de Black Jack ( ex-Democrates D ) Black Jack avec Black Jack *Petite sur - Album de Philemon L'Excuse avec Philemon *Un Ange en Danger - Avec Ron Carter , dans le documentaire Red , Hot &amp; Cool ( 1994 ) *La Bote de Pandore - Album de Julie Znatti La Bote de Pandore avec Julie Znatti ( 2007 ) *Trop de haine - Avec TooCool ( 2011 ) *Marche ou rve - Sur l'album The Revenge ( 2011 ) de Tom Fire *Le cur comme mtronome - Avec Bambi Cruz , sur l'album Peacetolet ( 2012 ) de Imposs. # Filmography # *1991 : ' ' Pour Kim Song-Man ' ' - short film by Costa-Gavras *2005 : ' ' Mort l ' cran ' ' as Jonathan - short film by Alexis Ferrebeuf *2011 : ' ' Illegal Love ' ' voice over - documentary by Julie Gali # Live albums # * ' ' Le Tour de la Question ' ' ( # 
 Spirituals ( or Negro spirituals ) are religious ( generally Christian ) songs that were created by enslaved African people in the United States . # Terminology and origin # The term ' ' spiritual ' ' is derived from ' ' spiritual song . ' ' The King James Bible 's translation of Ephesians 5:19 says : Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs , singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord . The term spiritual song was often used in the black and white Christian community through the 19th century ( and indeed much earlier ) , and spiritual was used as a noun to mean , according to the context , spiritual person or spiritual thing , but not specifically with regard to song . ' ' Negro spiritual ' ' first appears in print in the 1860s , where slaves are described as using ' ' spirituals ' ' for religious songs sung sitting or standing in place , and ' ' spiritual shouts ' ' for more dance-like music . Musicologist George Pullen Jackson extended the term folk hymnody , as in his 1938 book ' ' White Spirituals in the Southern Uplands ' ' , but this does not appear to have been widespread usage previously . The term , however , has often been broadened to include subsequent arrangements into more standard European-American hymnodic styles , and to include post-emancipation songs with stylistic similarities to the original Negro spirituals . Although numerous rhythmical and sonic elements of Negro spirituals can be traced to African sources , Negro spirituals are a musical form that is indigenous and specific to the religious experience in the United States of Africans and their descendants . They are a result of the interaction of music and religion from Africa with music and religion of European origin . Further , this interaction occurred only in the United States . Africans who converted to Christianity in other parts of the world , even in the Caribbean and Latin America , did not evolve this form . There is also a duality in the lyrics of spirituals . They communicated many Christian ideals while also communicating the hardship that was a result of being to the composer 's life . It was a way of sharing religious , emotional , and physical experience through song . # Alternative interpretations # Some scholarship claims that songs such as Wade in the Water contained explicit instructions to fugitive slaves on how to avoid capture , and on which routes to take to successfully make their way to freedom . Wade in the Water allegedly recommends leaving dry land and taking to the water as a strategy to throw pursuing bloodhounds off one 's trail . The Gospel Train , Song of the Free , and Swing Low , Sweet Chariot are likewise supposed to contain veiled references to the Underground Railroad , and many sources assert that Follow the Drinking Gourd contained a coded map to the Underground Railroad . The authenticity of such claims has been challenged as speculative , and critics like James Kelley have pointed to the apparent lack of primary source material in support of them . # Noted African American literary critic Sterling Allen Brown , who had interviewed former slaves and their children , was firm in his assertion in a Some scholars who have found parallels between the words of Negro and white spirituals would have us believe that when the Negro sang of freedom , he meant only what the whites meant , namely freedom from sin . Free , individualistic whites on the make in a prospering civilization , nursing the American dream , could well have felt their only bondage to be that of sin , and freedom to be religious salvation . But with the drudgery , the hardships , the auction-block , the slave-mart , the shackles , and the lash so literally present in the Negro 's experience , it is hard to imagine why for the Negro they would remain figurative . The scholars certainly do not make it clear , but rather take refuge in such dicta as : The slave did not contemplate his low condition . Are we to believe that the slave singing I been rebuked , I been scorned ; done had a hard time sho 's you bawn , referred to his being outside of the true religion ? Ex-slaves , of course , inform us differently . sin ( dear as that freedom was to the true believer ) but from physical bondage . Those attacking slavery as such had to be as rare as anti-Hitler marching songs in occupied France . But there were oblique references . Frederick Douglass has told us of the double-talk of the spirituals : Canaan , for instance , stood for Canada ; and over and beyond hidden satire the songs also were grapevines for communications . Harriet Tubman , herself called the Moses of her people , has told us that Go Down Moses was tabu in the slave states , but the people sang it nonetheless . # # Collections # # Jubilee Singers of Fisk University # In the 1850s , Reverend Alexander Reid , superintendent of the Spencer Academy in the old Choctaw Nation , hired some enslaved Africans from the Choctaws for some work around the school . He heard two of them , Uncle Wallace and Aunt Minerva Willis , singing religious songs that they had apparently composed . Among these were Swing Low , Sweet Chariot , Steal Away to Jesus , The Angels are Jordan , Roll . Later , Reid , who left Indian Territory at the beginning of the Civil War , attended a musical program put on by a group of Negro singers from Fisk University . They were singing mostly popular music of the day , and Reid thought the songs he remembered from his time in the Choctaw Nation would be at least as appropriate . He and his wife transcribed the songs of the Willises as they remembered them and sent them to Fisk University . The Jubilee Singers put on their first performance singing the old captives ' songs at a religious conference in 1871 . The songs were first published in 1872 in a book entitled ' ' Jubilee Songs as Sung by the Jubilee Singers of Fisk University ' ' , by Theodore F. Seward . Wallace Willis died in 1883 or 1884 . Over time , the pieces the Jubilee Singers performed came to be arranged and performed by trained musicians . In 1873 , Mark Twain , whose father had owned slaves , found Fisk singing to be in the genuine old way he in the ' ' Peoria Journal ' ' said : they have lost the wild rhythms , the barbaric melody , the passion .. They smack of the North .. Some fifty years later , Zora Neale Hurston in her 1938 book ' ' The Sanctified Church ' ' criticized Fisk singers , and similar groups at Tuskegee and Hampton , as using a Glee Club style that was full of musicians ' tricks not to be found in the original Negro spirituals , urging readers to visit an unfashionable Negro church to experience real Negro spirituals. # Other collections # A second important early collection of lyrics is ' ' Slave Songs of the United States ' ' by William Francis Allen , Charles Pickard Ware , and Lucy McKim Garrison ( 1867 ) . A group of lyrics to Negro spirituals was published by Colonel Thomas Wentworth Higginson , who commanded a regiment of former slaves during the Civil War , in an article in ' ' The Atlantic Monthly ' ' and subsequently included in his 1869 memoir ' ' Army Life in a Black Regiment ' ' century saw a resurgence of the Spiritual . This trend was impacted strongly by composers and musical directors such as Moses Hogan and Brazeal Dennard. 
 Rest may refer to : * Leisure * Human relaxation * Sleep Rest may also refer to : * Rest ( finance ) , a financial terminology * Rest ( music ) , a pause in a piece of music * Rest ( physics ) , the relation between two observers * ' ' Rest ' ' ( album ) , a 2008 album by Gregor Samsa * Rest ( band ) , Irish instrumental doom metal band * Rest , Kansas , a community in the United States * Bank reserves , holdings in accounts at the Bank of England , plus cash in bank vaults * Support ( structure ) ** Rest ( cue sports ) or mechanical bridge , a device supporting a cue stick on long shots in snooker , billiards and pool games ** Arm rest ** Head rest ** Footrest ** Leg rest REST written as an abbreviation may refer to : * RE1-silencing transcription factor , a human gene * Replica Exchange with Solute Tempering , an enhanced sampling technique in Molecular Dynamics * Representational State Transfer , a software architecture Environmental Stimulation Technique , a sensory deprivation technique * ReStructuredText , a lightweight markup language * Retail Employees Superannuation Trust , Australia 's largest superannuation fund by membership * Revised Extended Standard Theory , a theory of linguistic competence developed by Noam Chomsky in the mid-1970s 
 origin =Garden Grove , California , U.S. Bryan Keith Dexter Holland ( born December 29 , 1965 ) is an American musician and molecular biology graduate student , best known as the singer , rhythm guitarist , and primary songwriter for the punk rock band The Offspring . # Education and scientific career # Holland attended Pacifica High School in Garden Grove , California , where he graduated as class valedictorian in 1984 . During high school , Holland was the best student in mathematics in his year , and he found it just as exciting as punk rock . He then attended the University of Southern California , where he earned a B.S. in biology and an M.S. in molecular biology , and commenced a Ph.D . in molecular biology . After the success of The Offspring , he suspended his candidature to focus on music . Holland has said that , at 40 years of age , he would rather be a professor at a university than play music . As of 2013 , Holland is a doctoral student at the Laboratory of Viral Oncology and is supervised by Professor Suraiya Rasheed . In March 2013 , Holland and co-authors published a paper in ' ' PLoS One ' ' regarding microRNA in HIV genomes , titled Identification of Human MicroRNA-Like Sequences Embedded within the Protein-Encoding Genes of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus . The original academic paper describes the use of computational molecular biological ( ' ' in silico ' ' ) approaches to identify microRNA-like sequences in HIV . These sequences are suggested to have evolved to self-regulate survival of the virus in the host by evading its immune responses and thus influence the persistence , replication , and pathogenicity of HIV. # Musical career # Holland 's early influences include Aerosmith , The Beatles , Bob Dylan , KISS , Bob Marley , Queen , and The Rolling Stones . After he met friend and cross-country teammate Greg K. , they started a local punk band called Manic Subsidal in 1984 , where he played the drums . It formed after the duo failed to get into a Social Distortion concert in 1984 . After James Lilja was hired as their drummer , Holland switched albums , but some demos have existed online . After some line-up changes , Manic Subsidal changed their name to The Offspring in 1985 . After recording a demo in 1988 , The Offspring signed a deal with a small-time label , Nemesis Records , for whom they recorded their first full length album , ' ' The Offspring ' ' , in March 1989 . This album would eventually be re-issued on November 21 , 1995 by Holland 's own record label , Nitro Records . In 1991 , The Offspring signed with Epitaph Records ( home of Bad Religion , L7 , NOFX , Pennywise and other similar bands ) . Their first release on the label was ' ' Ignition ' ' , which was released in 1992 . Their last album for that label was 1994 's ' ' Smash ' ' , which still holds the world record for most sales of an album on an independent label . The band then signed with Columbia Records in 1996 ( although Dexter claims that Brett Gurewitz , owner of Epitaph and guitarist for Bad Religion , sold next six albums , ' ' Ixnay on the Hombre ' ' ( 1997 ) , ' ' Americana ' ' ( 1998 ) , ' ' Conspiracy of One ' ' ( 2000 ) , ' ' Splinter ' ' ( 2003 ) , ' ' Rise and Fall , Rage and Grace ' ' ( 2008 ) , and their most recent , ' ' Days Go By ' ' ( 2012 ) . Dexter Holland sometimes plays the piano during live shows . Occasionally the band plays Gone Away , with only Dexter playing the song on piano . # Business interests # Holland has his own brand of hot sauce named Gringo Bandito and featuring Holland with bandoliers , revolvers , a sombrero and shadesas a possible homage to the logo for Tapato hot sauce or Pancho Villa . Gringo Bandito was launched in late 2006 , after Holland , who grew up in Southern California where Mexican cuisine is considered a part of the way of life , wondered if he could do a hot sauce better . On the conception of the hot sauce , Mexican food , he began to read the label of a bottle of Tapato ; It just clicked that I had to make one , he says . People who like hot sauce are a certain type of people . They 're passionate . They 'll have a bottle with them wherever they go . I 'm one of those people . And when I 'm into something , I really get into it . It 's like my musicI liked records , so I learned how to play a guitar . After that ? A band . The headquarters for Gringo Bandito are located in a Huntington Beach industrial park , next to The Offspring 's recording studio . # Philanthropy # In 1997 , Holland and former Dead Kennedys singer Jello Biafra , teamed up to form the F.S.U. Foundation , which raised funds through charity concerts . The foundation did benefit shows to raise money for various charities including AIDS Project Los Angeles , Poor People 's United Fund , Trees Foundation , and Amnesty International . Holland participated in the 2006 Los Angeles Marathon ; his charity clinic that handles legal cases where post-conviction DNA testing of evidence can yield conclusive proof of innocence . # Personal life # Holland was married to hairstylist Kristine Luna , the sister of Andrea Luna , and a co-writer on the ' ' Ignition ' ' album . Holland and Luna met in 1992 and married in 1995 . They divorced in 2012 . Holland has a daughter , Alexa Holland , who goes by the stage name Lex Land and is a singer-songwriter. # Other interests # Holland is also a licensed Airline Transport Pilot and a Certified Flight Instructor who has made a solo trip around the world in ten days . Holland is also an avid collector of stamps from The Isle of Man . # Musical equipment # All of Holland 's Ibanez RG body guitars are made out of mahogany and fitted with DiMarzio Super Distortion bridge pickups . During their latest recordings , Holland used a vintage Gibson SG Junior . # Discography # # The Offspring # Holland appears on all nine of The Offspring 's albums . For a comprehensive list , see ' ' Hitler Bad , Vandals Good ' ' ( 1998 ) ( co-wrote Too Much Drama ) * AFI ' ' Black Sails in the Sunset ' ' ( 1999 ) ( Clove Smoke Catharsis , The Prayer Position and God Called In Sick ) * The Aquabats ' ' The Aquabats vs. the Floating Eye of Death ! ' ' ( 1999 ) ( co-wrote Amino Man ! and does backing vocals on that song ) * The Vandals ' ' Look What I Almost Stepped In ... ' ' ( 2000 ) ( co-wrote Jackass and does backing vocals on that song ) * Dwarves ' ' The Dwarves Must Die ' ' ( 2004 ) ( Salt Lake City and Massacre ) * Ron Emory ' ' Walk That Walk ' ' ( 2010 ) ( backing vocals on I 'm Not Alone ) * Dwarves ' ' The Dwarves Are Born Again ' ' ( 2011 ) ( Looking Out for Number One and Happy Birthday Suicide ) # Notes and references # 
 ICDO = Berylliosis , or chronic beryllium disease ( CBD ) , is a chronic allergic-type lung response and chronic lung disease caused by exposure to beryllium and its compounds . As an occupational lung disease , it is most classically associated with aerospace manufacturing , beryllium mining or manufacturing of fluorescent light bulbs ( which used to contain beryllium compounds in their internal phosphor coating ) . <ref> # References # 
 ' ' Suffer ' ' is the third album by American punk rock band Bad Religion , released on the Californian independent record label Epitaph Records on September 8 , 1988 . It was the first album that was both released and distributed by the label . Following the release of the EP ' ' Back to the Known ' ' ( 1985 ) , Bad Religion went on a temporary hiatus , then reunited with its original members and went to work on its first full-length studio album in five years . Although ' ' Suffer ' ' was not charted in Billboard , it has been cited by some critics as one of the most important punk rock albums of all time . After its release , ' ' Suffer ' ' quickly became Epitaph Records ' best seller and was the label 's best-selling album for a number of years , until the release of The Offspring 's 1994 highly acclaimed album ' ' Smash ' ' . A plethora of third-wave punk bands cite this album as a major inspiration ; NOFX 's Fat # Background # Bad Religion was formed in Southern California in 1980 by vocalist Greg Graffin and guitarist Brett Gurewitz . The pair hired Jay Bentley on bass and Jay Ziskrout on drums and began writing songs . In 1981 , the band released their eponymous debut EP on the newly formed label , Epitaph Records , which was and continues to be managed and owned by Gurewitz . In 1982 , the band released their first full-length album , ' ' How Could Hell Be Any Worse ? ' ' , gaining the band a sizable following . During the recording of that album , Ziskrout left the band and was replaced by Pete Finestone . After experiencing more lineup changes and releasing their second album , ' ' Into the Unknown ' ' ( 1983 ) , to lukewarm response , Bad Religion called it quits in 1984 . In 1984 , Greg Hetson of Circle Jerks fame , who had played the guitar solo for Part III on ' ' How Could Hell Be Any Worse ? ' ' , teamed up with Graffin on the song Running Teenage Lovedolls ' ' . Soon after , Graffin reassembled Bad Religion with Hetson replacing Gurewitz , who had gone into rehab for his drug problem . Bad Religion returned to a somewhat mellower , rock and roll version of their original sound with the EP ' ' Back to the Known ' ' ( 1985 ) , but disbanded temporarily soon after . By 1987 , Gurewitz had cleaned up his drug issues and struggled to find some kind of employment . After taking some vocational courses and a raft of odd jobs , he became a studio engineer and owner of a recording studio . Gurewitz noted , I really enjoyed , still enjoy , being a recording engineer , but I had a terrible time trying to make any money . And my hours were horrible . I just knew I wanted to be in music . Then , in 1987 , Bad Religion said , ' Hey man , why do n't we get the group back together ? . After Bad Religion finally reunited , they began writing new material and entered Westbeach Recorders in April , the album took eight days for the band to record and mix . During recording sessions , the band even demoed a revamped version of Fuck Armageddon ... This Is Hell , a track previously released on ' ' How Could Hell Be Any Worse ? ' ' . Whether they intended to include the song on ' ' Suffer ' ' is unknown and most unlikely . Members of L7 ( whose released their first album on Epitaph the same year ) played on the record . Donita Sparks and Suzi Gardner played guitar on Best for You and Jennifer Finch sang back-up vocals on Part II ( The Numbers Game ) . # Reception and legacy # The album received critical acclaim , Robert Christgau gave the album a B saying ; This comeback is hailed as a hardcore milestone , probably because it 's coherent . Relatively sane as their bitter analysis is--and I mean relative to both hardcore despair and mainstream complacency--it sounds a little pat . As if they 're already a little slow for speedrock and do n't want to upset the apple cart : *Alternative Press ( 3/02 , p. 96 ) - Included in AP 's Essential Punk Influences ' 02 Style - ... Their definitive album .... they 'd never eclipse this fireball of creative energy . *Kerrang ! ( p. 51 ) - With sonorous , soaring vocal hooks . The melding of power and melody proved a statement of absolute power . In a fan poll , Do What You Want was cited as one of the best Bad Religion songs of all time , along with American Jesus and Along The Way . Rancid 's Tim Armstrong has said that What Can You Do ? is his favorite Bad Religion track . In 2006 , ' ' Suffer ' ' was ranked as the top punk album of 1988 on Sputnikmusic . The album was also named the 99th most influential rock album of all time by Kerrang ! magazine . As of May 2010 , it is #2550 on Rate Your Music 's Top Albums of All Time list and #49 on their Best Albums of 1988 ranking . It placed at #6 on LA Weekly 's Top album cover features a drawing of a teenager on fire wearing a t-shirt of Bad Religion 's crossbuster logo , designed by Jerry Mahoney . The person on the cover has been taken by the band as a mascot , Boy on Fire is the name and can also be seen on Bad Religion accessories , including t-shirts . The cover art was also parodied for NOFX 's ' ' Surfer ' ' EP , which depicted a surfer on fire . # Accolades # The information regarding accolades attributed to ' ' Suffer ' ' is adapted from AcclaimedMusic.net. class= wikitable ! Publication ! Country ! Accolade ! Year ! Rank # Track listing # Track listing # Release history # # Personnel # * Greg Graffin vocals * Brett Gurewitz guitar * Greg Hetson guitar * Jay Bentley bass guitar * Pete Finestone drums * Donnell Cameron engineer * Legendary Starbolt engineer * Jerry Mahoney artwork 
 Sugar Ray Leonard and Thomas Hearns are considered to be two of the best boxers of all-time . They fought twice , once in 1981 and once in 1989 . Both fights are considered to be classics . # Leonard-Hearns I The Showdown # Sugar Ray Leonard won the WBC welterweight title with a fifteenth-round knockout of Wilfred Bentez in 1979 . He lost it to Roberto Durn by a close decision in June 1980 and regained it five months later in the infamous No Ms Fight , in which Duran quit in the eighth round . In June 1981 , Leonard moved up to the light-middleweight division for one fight , knocking out Ayub Kalule in nine rounds to win the WBA light-middleweight title . Hearns won the WBA welterweight title in 1980 , scoring a second-round knockout of Jose ' Pipino ' Cuevas in Detroit , Michigan . He made three successful title defenses , stopping Luis Primera , Randy Shields , and Pablo Baez . Promoted as The Showdown , Leonard ( 30-1 with 21 KO ) fought Hearns ( 32-0 with 30 KO ) , Nevada to unify the world welterweight championship in a scheduled fifteen-rounder . They fought before a live crowd of 23,618 and a worldwide TV audience of some 300 million . The fight began as expected , Leonard boxing from a distance and Hearns stalking . Leonard had difficulty with Hearns ' long reach and sharp jab . By the end of round five , Leonard had a growing swelling under his left eye , and Hearns had built a considerable lead on the scorecards . Leonard , becoming more aggressive , hurt Hearns in the sixth with a left hook to the chin . Leonard battered Hearns in rounds six and seven , but Hearns miraculously regrouped . Hearns started to stick and move , and he started to pile up points again . The roles reversed : Leonard became the stalker and Hearns became the boxer . Hearns won rounds nine through twelve on all three scorecards . Between rounds twelve and thirteen , Leonard 's trainer , the legendary Angelo Dundee , said the now legendary words You 're blowing it , son ! You 're blowing it came out roaring for the thirteenth round . After hurting Hearns with a right , Leonard exploded with a combination of punches and sent Hearns through the ropes . Hearns managed to rise , but was dropped again near the end of the round . In round fourteen , after staggering Hearns with an overhand right , Leonard pinned Hearns against the ropes , where he unleashed another furious combination , prompting referee Davey Pearl to stop the contest and award Sugar Ray Leonard the unified world welterweight championship . Hearns was leading by scores of 124-122 , 125-122 , and 125-121 . After the fight , there was controversy due to the scoring of rounds six and seven . Even though Leonard dominated , hurting Hearns and battering him , all three judges gave both rounds to Leonard by a 10-9 margin . Many felt that the ten-point must scoring system was not properly used and those rounds should have been scored 10-8. s-aft after=KO3 Bruce Finch # Leonard-Hearns II The War # Following The Showdown , Leonard defended the undisputed world welterweight championship once , knocking out Bruce Finch surgery to repair a detached retina in his left eye . Hearns moved up in weight and outpointed Wilfred Benitez to win the WBC light-middleweight title in 1982 . Two and a half years later , he challenged Marvin Hagler for the undisputed world middleweight championship , losing by a knockout in the third round of a very exciting fight . In early 1987 , he stopped Dennis Andries in ten rounds to win the WBC light-heavyweight title . Leonard made a one-fight comeback in 1984 and stopped Kevin Howard in nine rounds . However , Leonard suffered the first knockdown of his career and was so disappointed in his performance that he once again retired after the fight . In 1987 , Leonard came back again and fought Hagler for the middleweight championship . Leonard , a huge underdog , defeated Hagler by a twelve-round split decision . The following month , Leonard retired again . Hearns knocked out Juan Roldan in four rounds in late 1987 to win the vacant WBC middleweight title , becoming the first boxer to win world titles in four weight divisions . Hearns lost knockout against Iran Barkley . Hearns returned to win the inaugural WBO super-middleweight title against James Kinchen by a majority decision on 4 November 1988 to become the first boxer to win world titles in five weight divisions . Three days later , Leonard knocked out Don Lalonde in nine rounds to win both Lalonde 's WBC light-heavyweight title and the vacant WBC super-middleweight title . After almost eight years , the Leonard-Hearns rematch finally happened . It was promoted as The War . Leonard ( 35-1 with 25 KOs ) and Hearns ( 46-3 with 38 KOs ) met on June 12 , 1989 at Caesar 's Palace in a scheduled twelve-rounder for the WBC &amp; WBO super-middleweight titles . Hearns dropped Leonard with a right cross in the third round , but Leonard came back and battered Hearns around the ring in the fifth round . Early in the seventh round , Hearns hurt Leonard but punched himself out going for the knockout . With Hearns fatigued , Leonard came back and had a strong finish to the round . Rounds nine and ten were good rounds for Leonard . Three booming rights from Hearns sent Leonard down for the second time in the fight . Knowing he needed a big finish , Leonard fought furiously and had a big final round . The judges scored the fight a draw , with both boxers retaining their respective titles . Judge Jerry Roth scored the fight 113-112 for Hearns , Judge Tom Kazmarek scored it 113-112 for Leonard , and Judge Dalby Shirley scored it 112-112 . Shirley was the only judge to give Leonard a 10-8 margin in the twelfth . If he had scored it 10-9 , as his two colleagues did , Hearns would have won by a split decision . The decision was soundly booed , as most felt that Hearns had won . Eventually , Leonard admitted that Hearns deserved the decision . <nowiki> </nowiki> There was talk of a third fight , but it never happened . Leonard had his attorney , Mike Trainer , pursue a third fight , but Hearns said that he could no longer make the weight and was returning to light-heavyweight. s-aft after=W12 Roberto Durn # Notes # 
 deathplace = Affligem Abbey , Brabant Adeliza of Louvain , sometimes known in England as Adelicia of Louvain , also called Adela and Aleidis ; ( c. 1103 23 April 1151 ) was Queen of England from 1121 to 1135 , as the second wife of King Henry I. She was the daughter of Godfrey I , Count of Louvain. # Early life and family # Adeliza of Louvain was born in 1105 in Louvain , present-day Belgium . She was renowned for her beauty , reflected in the epithet the fair maiden of Brabant . The chronicler Henry of Huntingdon also mentions Adelizas beauty in an interlude in his Historia Anglorum stating , A jewel grows pale on you , a crown does not shine . Put adornment aside , for nature provides your adornment ... Her father was Godfrey I , Count of Louvain ( 1095-1139 ) , Landgrave of Brabant , and Duke of Lower Lotharingia ( 1106-1128 ) , an ally of Henry V , Holy Roman Emperor . After the death of Adelizas mother , Ida of Chiny , Godfrey married Clementia of Flanders who had fought with the French against the Normans in 1118 . Adeliza 's brother , Joscelin of Louvain , married the heiress to the Percy fortune . He is often referred to as an opportunist. . # Queenship # Plans for Adelizas marriage to Henry I of England , may have begun when she was as young as sixteen , even before Henrys only legitimate son , William Adelin , died on 25 November 1120 in the White Ship disaster . However , Henrys need for a new male heir expedited the marriage plans and the couple wed on 24 January 1121 . Apparently in addition to her beauty , Henry was also attracted to Adeliza as a wife because she was a descendant of Charlemagne . It is thought that Henrys only surviving legitimate child Empress Matilda , from his first wife Matilda of Scotland , may have been involved in arranging his second marriage , due to the fact that she was with him near the time that it was being negotiated . Henry of Huntingdon mentions the royal couple in his Historia Anglorum stating that the appears to have traveled extensively with Henry , likely to increase the chances of her conception . Despite their close contact , however , Adeliza and Henry never produced a child . Unlike Henrys first wife Matilda , Adeliza appears to have played a very passive role in the administration of the kingdom . While Matilda issued some thirty-one charters and writs during her queenship , during Adeliza 's fifteen-year marriage to Henry I she issued one , and she only attested 13 of Henrys many charters , even though they were almost always together . # Role as artistic patron # Despite her limited involvement in politics , Adeliza seems to have played an active role as a patron of the arts and literature , and was influential in fostering the rise of French poetry in the English court . While English queens had been traditionally associated with artistic patronage for decades , and a number of them , including Edith of Wessex , Emma of Normandy and Matilda , had financed a number of works in different media , Adeliza primarily sponsored books written in French . At the extremely popular , a trend given impetus by wealthy aristocratic women like Adeliza . Philippe de Thaon , an Anglo-Norman poet , dedicated his zoological treatise known as the Bestiary to the queen : # <poem> ' ' Philippe de Thaon Has distilled into a French treatise ' ' ' ' The Bestiary , A book in Latin , ' ' ' ' For the honour of a jewel Who is an outstandingly beautiful woman . ' ' ' ' And she is courtly and wise , Of good customs and generous : ' ' ' ' She is called Aaliz , Queen is she crowned , ' ' ' ' She is the queen of England ; May her soul never know trouble ! ' ' ' ' Listen to what we nd About her name in Hebrew : ' ' ' Aaliz is her name ; Praise of God is ' ' ' ' In Hebrew truly Aaliz , laus of God . ' ' ' ' I do not dare give further praise , Lest envy take me , ' ' ' ' But so that she may I wish to compose this book ; May God be present at its beginning ! ' ' </poem> # The Bestiary would have been amply illustrated , and was intended to be read page by page , not all at once , like a poem . Many other works that Adeliza commissioned were similar in structure to the Bestiary , including the now lost Life of King Henry by David . # Widowhood and remarriage # When Henry died on 1 December 1135 , Adeliza retired temporarily to the Benedictine convent of Wilton Abbey , near Salisbury . She was present at the dedication of Henry 's tomb at Reading Abbey on the first anniversary of his death . At about that time , she founded a leper hospital dedicated to Saint Giles at Fugglestone St Peter , Wiltshire . In 1138 , three years after Henry I 's death , Adeliza married William d'Aubigny , 1st Earl of Arundel , one of Henry I 's advisors , and son of Guillaume dAubigny and Maud le Bigod . Together , they lived at her castle of Arundel on the Sussex coast order of birth ) , Alice , William , Olivia , Reynor , Geoffrey , Henry , and Agatha . # Relationship with Matilda # Although not a great deal is known about Adelizas relationship with her stepdaughter , it is known she was present at the ceremony when Henry officially named Matilda as his heir , since the chronicler John of Worcester states that the Queen swore an oath for the kings daughter . After her second marriage , Adeliza received Matilda at her home in Arundel , along with Matildas half-brother Robert , 1st Earl of Gloucester , in defiance of the wishes of her husband who was a staunch supporter of King Stephen . She later betrayed them and handed them over when King Stephen besieged the castle . Trying to explain Adeliza 's actions , John of Worcester suggests that she feared the kings majesty and worried that she might lose the great estate she held throughout England . He also mentions Adelizas excuse to King Stephen , she swore on oath that his enemies had not come to England on her account but that she had close to her. # Landholdings # Because of Henry Is generosity , Adeliza was given the revenues of Rutland , Shropshire and a large district of London , with possession of the city of Chichester . Henry also gave the manor of Aston to Adeliza as his queen and wife . Landholdings that were part of Adeliza of Louvains dower include Waltham in Essex , an estate in south-east England , with areas in Hertfordshire and Bedfordshire , Buckinghamshire , Berkshire , and Middlesex . She had property in Devon . As a gift from Henry I , she was given a property in Ashleworth , a component of the royal estate of Berkeley . In 1126 the whole county of Shropshire was given to her , even though it is not listed in the Pipe Roll . Adeliza gave her brother Joscelin a large estate in Sussex called Petworth that was dependent on her castle of Arundel . Henry also gave Adeliza lands that had previously been Matildas including Waltham and Queenhithe . She had estates in Essex , Hertfordshire , Bedfordshire , Middlesex , Gloucestershire , and Devon . lands . In additions to those gifts , she was given a portion of the royal estate at Berkeley , and the county of Shropshire . After Matilda died , Adeliza continued to exercise jurisdiction over her lands , retaining some of her property until 1150 . In 1136 , she endowed Reading abbey with one hundred shillings a year from the revenues of Queenhithe . On the first anniversary of Henry Is death , Adeliza give the manor of Aston to the Abbey of Reading , and endowed them with lands to provide for the convent and other religious pweaona sic coming to the abbey on the occasion of the anniversary of my lord King Henry . She added the gift of a church a few years later . # Later years # In the last years of her life , Adeliza appears to have faded into obscurity . In 1150 , Adeliza left William to enter the monastery of Afflighem in Flanders . At least one of her brothers was also living at this monastery . The annals at the monastery are the only source to mention her death Some traditions imply she was buried at the monastery , but a donation made by her brother Joscelin to Reading Abbey seems to suggest she was buried there with Henry I. # Notes # 
 birthplace = London , Great Britain deathplace = Dublin , Ireland Michael Morris , 3rd Baron Killanin , MBE , TD ( 30 July 1914 25 April 1999 ) , was an Irish journalist , author , sports official , and the sixth President of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) . He succeeded his uncle as Baron Killanin in the Peerage of the United Kingdom in 1927 , which allowed him to sit in the House of Lords at the Palace of Westminster as Lord Killanin upon turning 21. # Early life # Morris was born in London . The son of Irish catholic Lt. Col. The Hon. George Morris who was from Spiddal in Co . Galway . The Morrises were one of the fourteen families making up ' the Tribes of Galway ' . His mother was Dora Wesley Hall , an Australian by birth , whose family was from Herefordshire in England . His father was killed in action near Villers-Cotterts , France , on 1 September 1914 while commanding the Irish Guards . He was educated at Summerfields , St Leonards-on-Sea , College , Cambridge , where he was President of the renowned Footlights dramatic club . In the mid-1930s , he began his career as a journalist on Fleet Street , working for the ' ' Daily Express ' ' , the ' ' Daily Sketch ' ' and subsequently the ' ' Daily Mail ' ' . In 193738 , he was war correspondent during the Second Sino-Japanese War . # Family # Lord Killanin married ( Mary ) Sheila Cathcart Dunlop ( 19182007 ) , MBE , of Oughterard , County Galway , in 1945 . She was the granddaughter of Henry Wallace Doveton Dunlop , who built Lansdowne Road Rugby Ground in Ballsbridge , Dublin , in 1872 . Her father was The Very Rev. Canon Douglas Lyall Chandler Dunlop , Church of Ireland Rector of Oughterard . Lord and Lady Killanin had three sons , George Redmond ( Red ) , Michael ( Mouse ) , and John , and a daughter , Deborah . # Military career # In November 1938 , the young Lord Killanin was commissioned into the Queen 's Westminsters , a territorial regiment recruiting fellow journalists , including future Daily Telegraph editor Bill Deedes , and friends who were musicians and actors . He reached the rank of Major and took part in the planning of D-Day and the Battle of Normandy in 1944 , acting as Brigade Major for the 30th Armoured Brigade , part of the 79th Armoured Division . He was appointed , due to the course of operations , a Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) . After being demobilised , he went to Ireland . He resigned his TA commission in 1951. # President of the IOC # In 1950 , Lord Killanin became the head of the Olympic Council of Ireland ( the OCI ) , and became his country 's representative in the IOC in 1952 . He became senior vice-president in 1968 , and succeeded Avery Brundage , becoming President elect at the 73rd IOC Session ( 2124 August ) held in Munich prior to the 1972 Summer Olympics . He took office soon after the Games . During his presidency , the Olympic movement experienced a difficult period , dealing the boycotts of the 1980 Moscow Olympics . Denver , originally selected to host the 1976 Winter Olympics , withdrew and had to be replaced by Innsbruck . The cities of Lake Placid and Los Angeles were chosen for 1980 Winter and 1984 Summer Games by default due to a lack of competing bids . Killanin resigned just before the Moscow Olympics in 1980 , and his position was taken over by Juan Antonio Samaranch . He was later unanimously elected Honorary Life President . # Other positions # Killanin served as Honorary Consul-General of Monaco in Ireland from 1961 to 1984. # Film # Lord Killanin was also a director of many companies and dabbled in the film industry , collaborating with his lifelong friend , John Ford , on ' ' The Quiet Man ' ' . He also produced films , including ' ' The Playboy of the Western World ' ' and ' ' The Rising of the Moon ' ' . # Death # Killanin died at his home in Dublin aged 84 and , following a bilingual funeral Mass at St Enda 's Church in family vault in the New Cemetery , Galway . # Selected works # * ' ' Four days , an account of the 1938 Munich crisis ' ' , edited by Lord Killanin . London , W. Heinemann , Ltd. ( 1938 ) . * ' ' Sir Godfrey Kneller &amp; His Times ' ' , by Lord Killanin . B. T. Batsford Ltd. , ( England ) ( 1948 ) . * ' ' Olympic Games ' ' , by Lord Killanin . MacMillan Publishing Company ( 1 February 1976 ) , ISBN 0-02-975730-4. * ' ' Shell Guide to Ireland ' ' , by Lord Killanin , M.V. Duignan , Peter Harbison ( Editor ) . Macmillan ; 3Rev Ed edition ( May 1989 ) . ISBN 0-333-46957-7. * ' ' The Fitzroy : The Autobiography of a London Tavern ' ' , by Lord Killanin , Sally Fiber , and Clive Powell-Williams . Temple House ; 1st edition ( 21 August 1995 ) . ISBN 1-85776-023-9. * ' ' My Olympic Years ' ' , by Lord Killanin . Martin Secker &amp; Warburg Ltd ; First Edition ( My Ireland : A Personal Impression ' ' , by Lord Killanin . Gallery Books ( Nov 1987 ) . ISBN 0-8317-6286-1. 
 Little London is a village situated between the North Hampshire Downs and the gravel plains of the Kennet valley , north of Basingstoke and south of Reading . It is situated within Pamber civil parish and backs on to Pamber Forest , a 500acre km2 SSSI and remnant of the much larger ancient Royal Forest of Pamber . It is recorded as having been established for at least 400 years . # History # Until the mid 19th century the village was a local centre for brick-making , the local clays being recognised as particularly good since the Roman period . Examples of clay roof tiles produced in this area for the nearby Roman town of Calleva Atrebatum ( near modern Silchester ) can be seen at Reading Museum . A major part of the village was confiscated from the Engelfield family and given to the Benyon family during the late Tudor period . Other parts were gifted in payment to The Queen 's College , Oxford . It is assumed that this was in return for education , although it may not have been . This legacy and houses in the area . The village has grown organically from a few houses , being effectively one street with no social centre . Current local planning policy has successfully prevented any inappropriate development of additional housing in the area . Current population is of only a few hundred . It is a desirable location , resulting in upper quartile house prices typical of rural Hampshire . The village has one Pub , The Plough , which maintains a very traditional ' English Pub ' environment . ' Little London ' is a common village name in England , assumed by some to have its origins in the quantity of seasonal Londoners who would camp for the harvest season . However in common with many ' Little Londons ' approximately 50 mi or so from London , it has also been claimed that the name was given by settlers escaping the Great Plague of London of 1665 . Alternatively , it could have been corrupted from ' Little Loddon ' , the name of a stream that marks the Southern extent of the village . Little London at Tadley would second half of the 16th century . It was on a main drovers route into London , like that at Oakley in Buckinghamshire . There have been at least 70 communities established in England and Wales , many of which still exist . They were temporary homes for the long distance drovers , moving their cattle to London , and the great fairs and markets of England . Tadley was on the route to the fairs of Blackbush , Farnham , Croydon and Kingston , and London 's Smithfield market . The sites were established on common land away from other communities . The drovers had a licence to travel , granted by Elizabeth 1st , and were regarded as foreigners by the local parishioners who could not travel without a settlement certificate . # Governance # The village of Little London is part of the civil parish of Pamber , which covers Pamber Heath , Pamber End , Pamber Green and Little London and meets in Pamber Heath Memorial Hall and St. Stephens Hall , Little London . It is also part of the Pamber and Silchester ward of Basingstoke Non-metropolitan district of Hampshire County Council . # Geography # # Community facilities # The main facility for the community is St. Stephens Hall , Silchester Road . # Transport # The village is served by Stagecoach in Hampshire Basingstoke bus routes 14 and 15 . The nearest railway station is east in Bramley. # Religious sites # The church of St. Stephen on Silchester Road is part of the Deanery of Basingstoke and the Diocese of Winchester and is linked to the parish of Bramley . There was also a Methodist Chapel on Silchester Road , built in 1867 which closed c1980 and was converted to a Bed and breakfast . 
 birthplace = Hamburg , Holy Roman Empire Johann Franz Encke ( 23 September 1791 26 August 1865 ) was a German astronomer . Among his activities , he worked on the calculation of the periods of comets and asteroids , measured the distance from the earth to the sun , and made observations of the planet Saturn . # Biography # Encke was born in Hamburg , where his father was a clergyman at the Jakobskirche . He was the youngest of eight children - when his father died when he was four , the family in straitened circumstances . Thanks to the financial assistance of a teacher , he was able to be educated at the Gelehrtenschule des Johanneums . He studied mathematics and astronomy from 1811 at the University of Gttingen under Carl Friedrich Gauss ; but he enlisted in the Hanseatic Legion for the campaign of 18131814 , serving as a sergeant in the artillery of the Prussian army , in Holstein and Mecklenburg . In 1814 he resumed his studies at the University but after Napoleon 's escape from Elba he returned to the become a lieutenant . Having returned to Gttingen in 1816 , he was at once appointed by Bernhardt von Lindenau as his assistant in the observatory of Seeberg near Gotha ( he had become acquainted with von Lindenau during his military service ) . There he completed his investigation of the comet of 1680 , for which the Cotta prize was awarded to him in 1817 by judges Gauss and Olbers ; he correctly assigned a period of 71 years to the comet of 1812 . That comet is now called ' ' 12P/Pons-Brooks ' ' . Following a suggestion by Jean-Louis Pons , who suspected one of the three comets discovered in 1818 to be the same one already discovered by him in 1805 , Encke began to calculate the orbital elements of this comet . At this time , all the known comets had an orbital period of seventy years and more , with an aphelion far beyond the orbit of Uranus . The most famous comet of this family was Comet Halley with its period of seventy-six years . So the orbit of the comet discovered by Pons have a period of 3.3 years , so that the aphelion had to be within the orbit of Jupiter . Encke predicted its return for 1822 , but this return was observable only from the southern hemisphere and was seen by Carl Ludwig Christian Rmker in Australia . The comet was also identified with the one seen by Pierre Mchain in 1786 and by Caroline Herschel in 1795 . Encke sent his calculations as a note to Gauss , Olbers , and Bessel . His former mathematics professor published this note and Encke became famous as the discoverer of the short periodic comets . The first object of this family , the Encke comet , was named after him and so it is one of the few comets not named after the discoverer , but after the one who calculated the orbit . Later this comet was identified as the origin of the Taurids meteor showers . The importance of the predicted return based on the calculation by Encke was rewarded by the Royal Astronomical Society in London by presenting their Gold Medal to him in 1824 . In this year author , bookseller and publisher Rudolph Zacharias Becker , the publisher of works from the Seeberg Observatory . They had three sons and two daughters . In 1825 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society . Eight masterly treatises on the comet 's movements were published by him in the ' ' Berliner Abhandlungen ' ' ( 18291859 ) . From a fresh discussion of the transits of Venus in 1761 and 1769 he deduced a solar parallax of 8.57 arcsecond . This and the corresponding distance to the sun were long accepted as authoritative . His results were published in two separate tracts , entitled ' ' Die Entfernung der Sonne ' ' ( The distance to the sun , 1822-1824 ) . In 1822 he became director of the Seeberg observatory , and in 1825 was promoted to a corresponding position at Berlin , where a new observatory , built under his superintendence and with the support of Alexander von Humboldt and King Frederick William III of Prussia , was inaugurated in 1835 . Mostly on the recommendation of Bessel , Encke became director of the new directed the preparation of the star maps of the Academy ( 18301859 ) ; beginning in 1830 , he edited and greatly improved the ' ' Astronomisches Jahrbuch ' ' ; and he issued four volumes of the ' ' Astronomische Beobachtungen auf der Sternwarte zu Berlin ' ' ( Observations of the Berlin observatory , 18401857 ) . Within the following time Encke was involved in the discovery and orbital parameter determination of other short periodic comets and asteroids . In 1837 , Encke described a broad variation in the brightness of the A Ring of Saturn . The Encke Gap was later named in honor of his observations of Saturn 's rings . In 1844 , Encke became professor for astronomy at the University of Berlin . Much labor was bestowed by him upon facilitating the computation of the movements of the asteroids . With this end in view he expounded to the Berlin Academy in 1849 a mode of determining an elliptic orbit from three observations , and communicated to that body in 1851 a new method of calculating planetary perturbations by means of rectangular coordinates ( republished ' ' , No. 141 , 1903 ) . Encke visited England in 1840 . He was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1836 . Incipient brain-disease compelled him to withdraw from official life in November 1863 . He still was director of the Berlin observatory until his death on 26 August 1865 in Spandau . His successor was Wilhelm Julius Foerster . He contributed extensively to the periodical literature of astronomy . Encke 's grave is preserved at a cemetery in the Kreuzberg section of Berlin , the ' ' Friedhof II der Jerusalems- und Neuen Kirchengemeinde ' ' ( Cemetery No . II of the congregations of Jerusalem 's Church and New Church ) ( entrance : opposite to 58-60 , Zossener Str. ; 61 , Baruther Street only for vehicles of the cemetery ) . His grave is close to that of the mathematician Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi. # Honors # *Twice , in 1824 and 1830 , the recipient of the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society . *The crater Encke on the Moon is named after him . *The Encke gap of Saturn 's rings is named after him . *The Comet Encke is named after him for his calculation of its orbit . # Notes # 
 The year 1805 in literature involved some significant events and new books . # Events # *January&amp;ndash ; September - Samuel Taylor Coleridge serves as Acting Public Secretary in Malta . *Early - Jacob Grimm is invited to Paris as an assistant to Friedrich Karl von Savigny. *New Theatre Royal , Bath , opens in England , replacing the Old Orchard Street Theatre . # New books # *Eugenia de Acton - ' ' The Nuns of the Desert ' ' *Sophie Ristaud Cottin - ' ' Mathilde ' ' ( translated as The Saracen ; or Matilda and Malek Adhel : A Crusade Romance ) *Charlotte Dacre - ' ' Confessions of the Nun of St. Omer ' ' *Robert Charles Dallas - ' ' The Morlands ' ' *Maria Edgeworth - ' ' The Modern Griselda ' ' *Jean-Baptiste Cousin de Grainville - ' ' Le Dernier Homme ' ' *Elizabeth Helme : ** ' ' The Chronicles of Christabelle de Mowbray ' ' ** ' ' The Pilgrims of the Cross ' ' *William Henry Ireland - ' ' Gondez the Monk ' ' *Matthew ' *Mary Meeke - ' ' The Wonder of the Village ' ' *Anna Maria Porter - ' ' A Sailor 's Friendship , and A Soldier 's Love ' ' *Catherine Selden - ' ' Villa Nova ' ' *Richard Sickelmore ' ' Rashleigh Abbey ' ' *William Frederick Williams - ' ' The Witcheries of Craig Isaf ' ' *Sophia Woodfall - ' ' The Child of the Abbey ' ' *R . P. M. Yorke - ' ' My Master 's Secret ' ' *Mary Julia Young - ' ' The Witches of Glenshiel ' ' # New drama # *Alexandre-Vincent Pineux Duval - ' ' Le Menuisier de Livonie ' ' *Adam Gottlob Oehlenschlger - ' ' Hakon Jarl ' ' # Poetry # *Ivan Pnin - ' ' God ' ' *Walter Scott - ' ' The Lay of the Last Minstrel ' ' *Martin Archer Shee - ' ' Rhymes on Art ' ' *Robert Southey - ' ' Madoc ' ' # Non-fiction # *Hosea Ballou - ' ' A Treatise on Atonement ' ' *Denis Diderot ( posthumously ) - ' ' Rameau Goethe ) *William Henry Ireland - ' ' The Confessions of William Henry Ireland ' ' *Robert Jenkinson , 2nd Earl of Liverpool - ' ' Treatise on the Coins of the Realm ' ' *Ellis Cornelia Knight - ' ' Description of Latium ' ' or ' ' La Campagna di Roma ' ' *Jane Marcet ( anonymously ) - ' ' Conversations on Chemistry ' ' *Mercy Otis Warren - ' ' History of the Rise , Progress , and Termination of the American Revolution ' ' # Births # *February 4 - William Harrison Ainsworth , English historical novelist ( died 1882 ) *April 2 - Hans Christian Andersen , Danish writer ( died 1875 ) *July 29 - Alexis de Tocqueville , French writer ( died 1859 ) *August 29 - F. D. Maurice , English theologian and novelist ( died 1872 ) *September 19 - John Stevens Cabot Abbott , American historian ( died 1877 ) *December 23 - Joseph Smith , American founder and prophet of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( killed 1844 ) # Deaths # *March 29 - Jean - Friedrich Schiller , German playwright ( born 1759 ) *May 25 - William Paley , English philosopher ( born 1743 ) *June 18 - Arthur Murphy ( Charles Ranger ) , Irish-born writer ( born 1727 ) *July 27 - Brian Merriman ( Brian Mac Giolla Meidhre ) , Irish language poet ( born c. 1749 ) *August 3 - Christopher Anstey , English poet ( born 1724 ) *September 3 - Johann Martin Abele , German publisher ( born 1753 ) * ' ' date unknown ' ' - Anna Hammar-Rosn , Swedish publisher ( born 1735 ) 
 A National Monument in the United States is a protected area that is similar to a National Park except that the President of the United States can declare an area of the United States to be a National Monument without the approval of Congress . However , areas within and extending beyond national parks , monuments , and national forests can be part of wilderness areas , which have an even greater degree of protection than a national park would alone , although wilderness areas managed by the United States Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management often allow hunting and grazing . National monuments can be managed by one of several federal agencies : the National Park Service , United States Forest Service , United States Fish and Wildlife Service , or Bureau of Land Management . Historically , some national monuments were managed by the U.S. War Department National monuments can be so designated through the power of the Antiquities Act of 1906 . President Theodore Roosevelt used the act to declare Devils Tower National Monument # History # The Antiquities Act of 1906 resulted from States The reference in the act to objects of ... scientific interest enabled President Theodore Roosevelt to make a natural Geology In 1908 , Roosevelt used the act to proclaim more than of the Grand Canyon as a national monument . In 1918 , President Woodrow Wilson proclaimed Katmai National Monument in Alaska , comprising more than 1000000acrekm2 lk=in . Katmai was later enlarged to nearly 2800000acrekm2 lk=in by subsequent Antiquities Act proclamations and for many years was the largest national park system unit . Petrified Forest , Grand Canyon , and Katmai were among the many national monuments later converted to national parks by Congress . In response to Roosevelt 's declaration of the Grand Canyon monument , a putative mining claimant sued in federal court , claiming that Roosevelt had overstepped the Antiquities Act authority by protecting an entire canyon . In 1920 , the United States Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the Grand Canyon was indeed an object of historic or scientific interest and could be protected by proclamation , setting a precedent for the use of the Antiquities Act to preserve large areas . Federal courts have Antiquities Act preservation authority . Substantial opposition did not materialize until 1943 , when President Franklin Delano Roosevelt In 1949 , for example , President Harry S. Truman proclaimed Effigy Mounds National Monument to accept a donation of the land from the state of Iowa , at the request of Iowa 's delegation . The most substantial use of the proclamation authority came in 1978 , when President Jimmy Carter proclaimed 15 new national monuments in Alaska after Congress had adjourned without passing a major Alaska lands bill strongly opposed in that state . Congress passed a revised version of the bill in 1980 incorporating most of these national monuments into national parks and preserves , but the act also curtailed further use of the proclamation authority in Alaska . The proclamation authority was not used again anywhere until 1996 , when President Bill Clinton proclaimed the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument in Utah . This action was widely unpopular in Utah , and bills were introduced to further restrict the president 's authority . To date , none of them have been enacted . Most of the 16 national monuments created Service , but by the Bureau of Land Management as part of the National Landscape Conservation System . New Monuments managed by the Park Service are Governors Island National Monument , Virgin Islands Coral Reef National Monument , and , formerly , ' ' Minidoka Internment National Monument ' ' ( since 2008 : Minidoka National Historic Site ) . George W. Bush proclaimed two very different monuments in 2006 , the hundredth anniversary of the Antiquities Act . African Burial Ground National Monument is a tiny archeological site in New York City . Northwestern Hawaiian Islands National Monument protects roughly 140000sqmikm2 lk=in of the Pacific Ocean , larger than all of America 's national parks combined . ( It was renamed Papahnaumokukea Marine National Monument in 2007 ) . Presidents have used the Antiquities Act 's proclamation authority not only to create new national monuments but to enlarge existing ones . For example , Franklin D. Roosevelt significantly enlarged Dinosaur National Monument in 1938 . Lyndon B. Johnson added Ellis Island to Statue of Liberty National Monument in 1965 , and Jimmy Carter made major additions to Glacier Bay National Bush used the Antiquities Act to create the Mariana Trench Marine National Monument , the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument , and the Rose Atoll Marine National Monument . In April 2012 President Barack Obama established the Fort Ord National Monument in California 's Central Coast region . In September 2012 , Obama established the Chimney Rock National Monument in Colorado . and in October 2012 established the Cesar E. Chavez National Monument . In March 2013 President Barack Obama designated five new National Monuments : the Charles Young Buffalo Soldiers National Monument in Ohio , the First State National Monument in Delaware , the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Monument in Maryland , the Ro Grande del Norte National Monument in New Mexico , and the San Juan Islands National Monument in Washington . In May 2014 , President Barack Obama designated an additional National Monument , the Organ Mountains-Desert Peaks National Monument in New Mexico # List of National Monuments # 
 Cod liver oil is a nutritional supplement derived from liver of cod fish . As with most fish oils , it has high levels of the omega-3 fatty acids , eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA ) and docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) . Cod liver oil also contains vitamin A and vitamin D. It has historically been taken because of its vitamin A and vitamin D content . It was once commonly given to children , because vitamin D has been shown to prevent rickets and other symptoms of vitamin D deficiency . # Manufacture # Cod liver oil was traditionally manufactured by filling a wooden barrel with fresh cod livers and seawater and allowing the mixture to ferment for up to a year before removing the oil . Modern cod liver oil is made by cooking the whole cod body tissues of fatty fish during the manufacture of fish meal . # Therapeutic uses # Cod liver oil is widely taken to ease the pain and joint stiffness associated with arthritis . The Recommended Dietary Allowance of vitamin A is 900 g per day for adult men and 15 g per day . The tolerable upper intake levels are 3000 g/day and 100 g/day respectively , so people consuming cod liver oil as a source of omega-3 fatty acids should pay attention to how much vitamin A and vitamin D this adds to their diet . A 300 mg soft gelatin capsule like those made by brands like seven seas and seacod by sanofi contain approximately 88 g vitamin A per dose . Cod liver oil may be an effective complementary measure for long-term treatment of multiple sclerosis . Use of cod liver oil during pregnancy is associated with lower risk of Type I diabetes in the offspring . ( although see adverse effects below ) . This effect was found only in mothers taking cod liver oil , not in mothers taking multivitamin supplements . Cod liver oil taken by nursing mothers improves the breast milk by increasing the amount of fatty acids , which promotes brain development , and the amount of vitamin A , which helps prevent infections , but the level of vitamin D is unchanged . A Norwegian study of more than 68,000 women oil supplements had significantly reduced mortality ( 25% for all cancers , 45% for lung cancer ) compared to women who did not take such supplements . Vitamin A accumulates in the liver , and can reach harmful levels sufficient to cause hypervitaminosis A. Pregnant women may want to consider consulting a doctor when taking cod liver oil because of the high amount of natural forms of vitamin A such as retinol . High doses of synthetic vitamin A ( retinoids ) have been shown to cause birth defects . A toxic dose of retinol ( vitamin A ) is around 25 000 IU/kg ( see Retinol#Retinoid overdose ( toxicity ) ) , or the equivalent of about 1.25 kg of cod liver oil for a 50 kg person . There is an increased risk of prostate cancer in men taking supplements with high levels of omega-3 fatty acids , including cod liver oil . The risks of hypervitaminosis and of exposure to environmental toxins such as mercury , polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) , dioxins , and other contaminants , are reduced when purification processes are applied to produce refined fatty acids , such as EPA and DHA . A high intake of cod liver oil by pregnant women is associated with a nearly fivefold increased risk of gestational hypertension. # Other uses # In Newfoundland , cod liver oil was sometimes used as the liquid base for traditional red ochre paint , the coating of choice for use on outbuildings and work buildings associated with the cod fishery . In Tbingen , Germany ; cod liver oil is used as the punishment for the loser at the traditional : de:Stocherkahnrennen , a punting boat race by University groups . 
 ' ' Tree and Leaf ' ' is a small book published in 1964 , containing two works by J. R. R. Tolkien : * a revised version of an essay called On Fairy-Stories ( originally published in 1947 in ' ' Essays Presented to Charles Williams ' ' ) * an allegorical short story called Leaf by Niggle ( originally published in the ' ' Dublin Review ' ' in 1945 ) . The book was originally illustrated by Pauline Baynes . Mythopoeia was added to the 1988 edition ( ISBN 0395502322 ) . Later versions also include The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth Beorhthelm 's Son . Both pieces were re-issued in the collection ' ' The Tolkien Reader ' ' ( 1966 ) , and have also appeared in various subsequent collections . 
 Mary Baker ( ne Willcocks ) ( 1791 24 December 1864 ) was a noted impostor who went by the name Princess Caraboo . She pretended to be from a far off island kingdom and fooled a British town for some months . # Biography # On 3 April 1817 , a cobbler in Almondsbury in Gloucestershire , England , met an apparently disoriented young woman wearing exotic clothes who was speaking an incomprehensible language . The cobbler 's wife took this stranger to the Overseer of the Poor , who placed her in the hands of the local county magistrate , Samuel Worrall , who lived in on the estate where Tower House is located . Worrall and his American-born wife Elizabeth could not understand her either ; what they did determine was that she called herself Caraboo and that she was interested in Chinese imagery . They sent her to the local inn , where she identified a drawing of a pineapple with the word ' ananas ' , meaning pineapple in many Indo-European languages , and insisted on sleeping on the floor . Samuel Worrall Bristol and tried for vagrancy . During her imprisonment , a Portuguese sailor named Manuel Eynesso ( or Enes ) said he spoke her language and translated her story . According to Enes , she was Princess Caraboo from the island of Javasu in the Indian Ocean . She had been captured by pirates and after a long voyage she had jumped overboard in the Bristol Channel and swam ashore . The Worralls brought Caraboo to their home . For ten weeks , this representative of exotic royalty was a favourite of the local dignitaries . She used a bow and arrow , fenced , swam naked and prayed to a god , whom she named Alla-Tallah . She acquired exotic clothing and her portrait was painted and reproduced in local newspapers . Her authenticity was attested to by a Dr Wilkinson , who identified her language using Edmund Fry 's ' ' Pantographia ' ' and stated that marks on the back of her head were the work of oriental surgeons . Eventually the truth surfaced . A boarding-house keeper , Mrs. Neale , recognised her from the picture in hosts . This would-be princess was in truth a cobbler 's daughter , Mary Baker ( ne Willcocks ) from Witheridge , Devon . She had been a servant girl around England but had found no place to stay . She invented her fictitious language from imaginary and gypsy words and created an exotic character and story . The odd marks on her head were scars from a crude cupping operation in a poorhouse hospital in London . The British press had a field day at the expense of the duped rustic middle-class . Her hosts arranged for her to travel to Philadelphia and she departed 28 June 1817 . On 13 September 1817 a letter was printed in the ' ' Bristol Journal ' ' , allegedly from Sir Hudson Lowe , the official in charge of the exiled Emperor Napoleon on St. Helena . It claimed that after the Philadelphia-bound ship bearing the beautiful Caraboo had been driven close to the island by a tempest , the intrepid princess impulsively cut herself adrift in a small boat , rowed ashore and so fascinated the emperor that he was applying That story is unverified . In the USA , she briefly continued her role , appearing on-stage at the Washington Hall , Philadelphia , as ' Princess Caraboo ' , with little success . Her last contact with the Worralls was in a letter from New York in November 1817 , in which she complained of her notoriety . She appears to have returned to Philadelphia until she left America in 1824 , returning to England . In 1824 she returned to Britain and exhibited herself for a short time in New Bond Street , London , as ' Princess Caraboo ' but her act was not successful . She may have briefly travelled to France and Spain in her guise , but soon returned to England . In September 1828 , she was living as a widow in Bedminster under the name Mary Burgess ( in reality the name of a cousin ) . There she married Richard Baker , and gave birth to a daughter the following year . In 1839 , she was selling leeches to the Bristol Infirmary Hospital . She died on 24 December 1864 and # Film # The hoax provided material for a script , filmed in 1994 , ' ' Princess Caraboo ' ' , written by Michael Austin and John Wells , which added some fictional elements to the story . # Notes # 
 At the 1904 Summer Olympics , in St. Louis , diving debuted as an official two-event Olympic sport , exclusive for men . The competitions were held on Monday , September 5 , 1904 and on Wednesday , September 6 , 1904 . It included the only Olympic appearance of the plunge for distance event . **20;98184;div # Medal summary # - - - # Participating nations # A total of ten divers from two nations competed at the St. Louis Games : * * # Medal table # - ! colspan=2 Total 2 2 3 7 
 deathplace = Lil Hardin Armstrong ( February 3 , 1898 August 27 , 1971 ) was a jazz pianist , composer , arranger , singer , and bandleader , and the second wife of Louis Armstrong with whom she collaborated on many recordings in the 1920s . Hardin 's compositions include Struttin ' With Some Barbecue , Do n't Jive Me , Two Deuces , Knee Drops , Doin ' the Suzie-Q , Just For a Thrill ( which became a major hit when revived by Ray Charles in 1959 ) , Clip Joint , and Bad Boy ( a minor hit for Ringo Starr in 1978 ) , her composition Oriental Swing was sampled heavily to create Parov Stelar 's 2012 retro-song Booty Swing , which in turn gained notoriety when it was used in a 2013 Chevrolet commercial . # Background # She was born as Lillian Hardin in Memphis , Tennessee , where she grew up in a household with her grandmother , Priscilla Martin , a former slave from near Oxford , Mississippi . During her early years , Hardin was taught hymns , drawn to popular music and later blues , but could only listen to or play these styles occasionally and covertly , because her mother , Dempsey ( Lil called her Decie ) , a deeply religious woman , considered them sinful . # Early education and mentors # Hardin first received piano instruction from her third grade teacher , Miss Violet White , then her mother enrolled her in Mrs. Hook 's School of Music . I later learned that they had taught me all the wrong things , Hardin recalled in 1971 , but they meant well . It was at Fisk University , a college for African Americans located in downtown Nashville , that Hardin was taught a more acceptable approach to the instrument . Hardin stayed at the school for one year , returning to Memphis in 1917 . In August 1918 , she moved to Chicago with her mother and stepfather . By then , she had become proficient in reading music , a skill that landed her a job as a sheet music demonstrator at Jones Music Store . The proprietor , Jennie Jones , also performers to the store . A visit by Jelly Roll Morton would profoundly affect Hardin 's musical education . He sat down , she wrote in her unpublished biography , the piano rocked , the floor shivered , the people swayed while he attacked the keyboard with his long skinny fingers , beating out a double rhythm with his feet on the loud pedal . Oh , was I thrilled and amazed . He finally got up from the piano , grinned and looked at me as if to say , ' Let this be a lesson to you . ' Well it was a lesson . When a small crowd urged Hardin to play something for Morton , she did . I laid Witches Dance and Rachmaninoff 's Prelude in C Sharp Minor on him . Morton 's visit had a profound effect on Hardin , who began embellishing the sheet music with her own ideas , much to the delight of customers . She had been on the job for three weeks when clarinetist Lawrence Duh 's New Orleans Creole Jazz Band came in for an audition . Jones Hardin there when Duh was asked to add a pianist . I did my best to be a miniature Jelly Roll Morton , she said , and Duh decided to keep me . The store had been paying Hardin $3 a week , but Duh offered $22.50 . Knowing that her mother would not approve of her working in a cabaret , she made it known that her new job was playing for a dancing school . Three weeks later , the band moved on to a better booking at the De Luxe Caf , where the entertainers included Florence Mills and Cora Green . From there , the band moved up to the jewel of Chicago 's night life , the Dreamland . Here the principal entertainers were Alberta Hunter and Ollie Powers , and there was no finer night spot in Chicago . When King Oliver 's Creole Jazz Band replaced Duh 's group at the Dreamland , Oliver asked Hardin to stay with him . She was with Oliver at the Dreamland in 1921 , when an offer came for the orchestra to play a six-month engagement at that booking , Hardin returned to Chicago while the rest of the Oliver band went on to Los Angeles . # Marriages and divorces # In Chicago , Hardin went back to work at the Dreamland , as pianist in an orchestra for Mae Brady , a violinist and vaudeville stalwart . While there , she fell for Jimmie Johnson , a young singer from Washington , D.C. , whom she married on August 22 , 1922 . The marriage was short-lived , ending in divorce . In the meantime , the Oliver band returned from California and opened at the Royal Gardens , with Bertha Gonzales at the piano , but soon found itself back at the Dreamland , with Hardin at the piano . His band was enjoying enormous success at the Dreamland when King Oliver sent for Louis Armstrong to join as second cornetist . Armstrong was beginning to make a name for himself in their hometown , New Orleans , and regarded Oliver ( Papa Joe ) as his mentor . Some say that Oliver saw Louis as a threat to his jazz throne and decided that containment , although by all accounts both cornetists enjoyed working together . At first , Hardin was unimpressed with Louis , who arrived in Chicago wearing clothes and a hair style that she deemed to be too country for Chicago , but she worked to take the country out of him and a romance developed ( to the surprise of other band members , some of whom had been trying to woo pretty Hardin for some time with no success ) . She already had divorce experience and helped Louis get a divorce from his first wife Daisy , from whom he had separated back in New Orleans . Hardin and Louis were married on February 4 , 1924 . Hardin took Louis shopping and taught him how to dress more fashionablyshe also got rid of his bangs , and began working on his career . Recognizing his extraordinary talent , she felt that he was wasting it in a secondary role . Louis was happy to be playing next to his idol , but Hardin eventually persuaded him to leave Oliver and go it on his own . Armstrong eventually , accepted a job with Fletcher Henderson in New York City . Hardin stayed in Chicago , first with Oliver , then leading a band of her own . When Hardin 's band got a job at the Dreamland Caf in Chicago , the following year , she prepared for Louis ' return to Chicago by having a huge banner made to advertise him as The World 's Greatest Trumpet Player . Louis was gaining an impressive reputation when Richard M. Jones convinced Okeh Records to make a series of sessions under his name : the classic Armstrong Hot Five recordings . With Hardin at the piano , Kid Ory on trombone , Johnny Dodds on clarinet , and Johnny St. Cyr on banjo , this stellar group rehearsed at Louis and Hardin 's residence on Chicago 's East 41st Street and held its first session on November 15 , 1925 . Few recordings are as celebrated as the ones made by the Hot Five ( and , sometimes , with Earl Hines replacing Hardin , the Hot Seven ) between then and the end of 1928 . Hardin had actually , in April and May 1926 . She also recorded a session for Columbia Records as the New Orleans Wanderers . In the late 1920s Hardin and Louis grew apart . Armstrong formed a new Hot Five , with Earl Hines on piano . Hardin reformed her own band with Freddie Keppard on cornet ( whom Hardin considered second only to Louis ) . Louis and Hardin separated in 1931 , when he had begun a liaison with Alpha Smith , who threatened to sue Armstrong for breach of promise , so he begged Hardin not to grant him a divorce . I felt sorry for Louis , Hardin later recalled , but he had two-timed me , so I gave him a divorce just to teach him a lessonand I sued him , too . # Later years # In the 1930s , sometimes billing herself as Mrs. Louis Armstrong , Hardin led an All Girl Orchestra , then a mixed gender Big Band which broadcast nationally over the NBC radio network . The same decade she recorded a series of sides for Decca Records as a Swing ( genre early 1950s , Hardin worked mostly as a soloist singing and playing piano . In the late 1940s , she decided to leave the music and become a tailor , so she took a course in tailoring . Her graduation project was to make a tuxedo for Louis . It was displayed prominently at a New York cocktail party she threw to announce her new field of endeavor . They looked at Louis ' tux and all the other things I had made and they were very impressed , she recalled , but then someone asked me to play the piano . That 's when I knew that I would never be able to leave the music business . Louis wore Hardin 's tuxedo and she continued to tailor , but only as a sideline and then only for friends . Her shirts , which friends received regularly on birthdays , proudly bore a label with her mother 's name , Decie , and beneath that , Hand made by Lil Armstrong . Hardin eventually returned to Chicago and the house on East 41st Street . She also made a trip , but mostly she worked around Chicago , often with fellow Chicagoans . Collaborators included Red Saunders , Joe Williams , Oscar Brown , Jr. , and Little Brother Montgomery . In the 1950s , Hardin recorded a biographical narrative for Riverside 's Bill Grauer , which was issued in LP form . She would again appear on that label in 1961 , participating in its Chicago : The Living Legends project as accompanist for Alberta Hunter and leader of her own hastily assembled big band . At that time , her favorite living pianists were Thelonious Monk and Billy Taylor , which helps to explain why , when Riverside producer Chris Albertson approached her about these recordings , her immediate reaction was , Who 's going to listen to that old stuff ? The Riverside recordings led to her inclusion in a star-studded 1961 NBC network special , Chicago and All That Jazz , and a follow-up album released through the Verve Records imprint . In 1962 , Hardin began writing her autobiography , in collaboration with Albertson , but she had second thoughts when she realized that such a might discomfit Louis Armstrong , so the project was shelved with only five chapters written . # Death # When Armstrong died , in 1971 , Hardin was deeply shaken by the loss . She traveled to New York for the funeral and rode in the family car . I think Louis would have found a way getting back at me if I had n't put Hardin in that car , his widow , Lucille , told Albertson . Returning to Chicago , Hardin felt that work on her autobiography could now continue , but the following month , performing at a televised memorial concert for Louis , Lil Hardin Armstrong collapsed at the piano . She died an hour later , aged 73. 
 imageskyline = CahirCastle06.JPG subdivisiontype = Country Cahir ( ; ) is a town in County Tipperary in Ireland . The town is best known for its castle and the Swiss Cottage . It is in the barony of Iffa and Offa West . # Location and access # For much of the twentieth century , Cahir stood at an intersection of two busy national roadways : the Dublin to Cork N8 , and the Limerick to Waterford N24 . The N8 was realigned in 1991 to run west of the town , while the old road through it was renumbered the R670 . Traffic from the N24 still left the town badly congested , however , until October 2007 when this road was also realigned to bypass Cahir to the north and east . The same road improvement scheme saw major changes to the N8 corridor : a new motorway , the M8 , was constructed west of the town between 2006 and 2008 . Access to Cahir from this motorway is gained at Junctions 10 and 11 . Cahir is on the LimerickWaterford regional railway line . . There are two trains a day to Tipperary and Limerick Junction and two to Clonmel , Carrick on Suir and Waterford . There is no Sunday service . Bus ireann runs regular services to Dublin , Cork , Limerick and Waterford through the town . # History # The name ' ' Cathair ' ' or ' ' an Chathair ' ' translates as stone ringfort , while the name ' ' Cathair Dn Iascaigh ' ' means town of the fort of the fishery . In older accounts , it was often spelled ' ' Caher ' ' . For much of its history , the town has been influenced by the Butler dynasty # Amenities and features # Cahir Castle , which is situated on a small island in the River Suir , is the town 's main tourist attraction . Cahir has a fine Church of Ireland parish church , still in use , designed by John Nash , one of only three ecclesiastical buildings he designed in Ireland . Another major attraction is the Swiss Cottage along with numerous specialty heritage walks . The nearby Galtee home to Glengarra Wood , which is a popular walking area . The Knockmealdown Mountains stand south of the town , while to the southwest lie the Mitchelstown Caves . The salmon weir , on the opposite side of the bridge from the castle , is a popular location to fish . Cahir is a small heritage town . A shopping precinct is centred around the town square adjacent to Castle Street . The town has a leisure centre ( Duneske ) , an all-weather soccer pitch , all weather tennis courts , a Downhill mountain-biking track and a GAA pitch . An 18 hole Golf course lies a few kilometres outside the town . # Education # *Cahir Boys National School *Our Lady of Mercy Primary School *Coliste Dn Iascaigh ( Secondary School ) # Sport # Cahir has a number of teams in various sports , Cahir GAA are the local gaelic team and play in the GAA pitch located on the Ardfinnan road . They were Tipperary Senior Football Champions in 2003 . Cahir Park AFC are the local junior soccer team . Formed in 1912 they are . Their ground is also located in Cahir Park on the Ardfinnan road . # Notable people # *John Noel Dempsey ( 1915&amp;ndash ; 89 ) , Lieutenant Governor of Connecticut 1959&amp;ndash ; 61 and Governor of Connecticut 1961&amp;ndash ; 71. *Michael Murphy ( 1831&amp;ndash ; 93 ) , awarded the Victoria Cross , which he later forfeited. *Brenda Hyland , winner of the Rose of Tralee competition in 1983 ( although she represented County Waterford ) . *Tommy O'Donnell , Munster and Ireland Rugby Player . * Richard Butler , last Baron Cahir and 2nd Earl of Glengall , is buried here . *Richard Pennefather , eminent Irish judge , is buried here . # International relations # Cahir is twinned with the town of Scarborough in the United Kingdom . # Image gallery # # See also # * List of towns in Ireland * Market Houses in Ireland 
 ' ' Hedda ' ' is a 1975 film adaptation of Henrik Ibsen 's ' ' Hedda Gabler ' ' . It stars Peter Eyre , Glenda Jackson and Patrick Stewart and was directed by Trevor Nunn . This was the first ( and so far the only ) major theatrical film version of the play in English . Previous productions of the play in English with sound had all been made for television . It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress ( Glenda Jackson ) . The film was also screened at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival , but was n't entered into the main competition . # Cast # * Glenda Jackson - Hedda Gabler * Peter Eyre - Jrgen Tesman * Timothy West - Judge Brack * Jennie Linden - Thea Elvsted * Patrick Stewart - Ejlert Lvborg * Constance Chapman - Juliane Tesman ( Aunt Julie ) * Pam St. Clement - Berthe 
 birthplace = Los Angeles , California , U.S. deathplace = Beverly Hills , California , U.S. Robert Stack ( born Charles Langford Modini Stack , January 13 , 1919 May 14 , 2003 ) was a multilingual American actor and television host . In addition to acting in more than 40 feature films , he starred in the 195963 television series ' ' The Untouchables ' ' and later hosted ' ' Unsolved Mysteries ' ' from 1987 until 2002. # Early life # Robert Stack was born Charles Langford Modini Stack in Los Angeles , California , but his first name ( selected by his mother ) was changed to Robert by his father . He spent his early childhood growing up in Europe . He became fluent in French and Italian at an early age , and did not learn English until returning to Los Angeles . His parents divorced when he was a year old , and he was raised by his mother , Mary Elizabeth ( ne Wood ) . His father , James Langford Stack , a wealthy advertising agency owner , died mother with the greatest respect and love . When he collaborated with Mark Evans on his autobiography , ' ' Straight Shooting , ' ' he included a picture of himself and his mother . He captioned it , Me and my best girl . His grandfather was an opera singer named Charles Wood , who went by the name Modini . By the time he was twenty , Stack had achieved minor fame as a sportsman . He was an avid polo player and shooter . He and his brother won the International Outboard Motor Championships , in Venice , Italy ; and , at age 16 , he became a member of the All-American Skeet Team . He set two world records in skeet shooting and became National Champion . In 1971 , he was inducted into the National Skeet Shooting Hall of Fame . # Career # Stack took drama courses at Bridgewater State College . His deep voice and good looks attracted producers in Hollywood . When Stack visited the lot of Universal Studios at age 20 , producer Joe Pasternak offered him an opportunity to enter How 'd you like to be in pictures ? We 'll make a test with Helen Parrish , a little love scene . ' Helen Parrish was a beautiful girl . ' Gee , that sounds keen , ' I told him . I got the part . Stack 's first film , which teamed him with Deanna Durbin , was ' ' First Love ' ' , in 1939 ; this film was considered controversial at the time . He was the first actor to give Durbin an on-screen kiss . Stack won acclaim for his next role , ' ' The Mortal Storm ' ' ( 1940 ) starring Margaret Sullavan and James Stewart . He played a young man who joins the Nazi party . As a youth , Stack mentioned that he had a crush on Carole Lombard and in 1942 he appeared with her in ' ' To Be or Not To Be . ' ' He admitted he was terrified going into this role , but he credited Lombard with giving him many tips on acting and with being his mentor . Lombard was killed . During World War II , Stack served as gunnery instructor in the United States Navy . He continued his film career with roles in such films as ' ' Fighter Squadron ' ' ( 1948 ) with Edmond O'Brien ; ' ' A Date with Judy ' ' ( 1948 ) starring Wallace Beery and Elizabeth Taylor ; and the 1952 adventure epic ' ' Bwana Devil ' ' , considered the first color , American 3-D feature film . In 1954 , Stack was given his most important movie role . He appeared opposite John Wayne in ' ' The High and the Mighty ' ' . Stack played the pilot of an airliner who comes apart under stress after the airliner encounters engine trouble . In 1957 , Stack was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for ' ' Written on the Wind ' ' . He felt the primary reason he lost the Oscar to Anthony Quinn was that 20th Century Fox , who had loaned him to Universal International , organized block voting against him to prevent one of their contract players from Stack portrayed the crimefighting Eliot Ness in the award-winning ABC television hit drama series , ' ' The Untouchables ' ' ( 195963 ) . The show portrayed the ongoing battle between gangsters and a special squad of federal agents in prohibition-era Chicago . The show won Stack a Best Actor Emmy Award in 1960 . He starred in three other drama series , rotating the lead with Tony Franciosa and Gene Barry in the lavish ' ' The Name of the Game ' ' ( 19681971 ) , ' ' Most Wanted ' ' , ( 1976 ) and ' ' Strike Force ' ' ( 1981 ) . In ' ' The Name of the Game ' ' , he played a former federal agent turned true-crime journalist , evoking memories of his role as Ness . In both ' ' Most Wanted ' ' and ' ' Strike Force ' ' he played a tough , incorruptible police captain commanding an elite squad of special investigators , also evoking the Ness role . Eventually , he reprised the role in a 1991 television movie , ' ' The own persona in comedies such as ' ' 1941 ( film ) He began hosting ' ' Unsolved Mysteries ' ' in 1987 . He thought very highly of the interactive nature of the show , saying that it created a symbiotic relationship between viewer and program , and that the hotline was a great crime-solving tool . ' ' Unsolved Mysteries ' ' aired from 1987 to 2002 , first as specials in 1987 ( Stack did not host all the specials , which were previously hosted by Raymond Burr and Karl Malden ) , then as a regular series on NBC ( 198897 ) , then on CBS ( 199799 ) and finally on Lifetime ( 200102 ) . Stack served as the show 's host during its entire original series run . For a brief period between 20012002 , Stack voiced Stoat Muldoon , a character featured on the computer-animated television series , ' ' Butt-Ugly Martians ' ' on Nickelodeon . In 1996 , a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs , California , Walk of Stars was dedicated to him . # Death # Stack death . He underwent radiation therapy for prostate cancer in October 2002 and died of a heart attack on May 14 , 2003 . He is interred in the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Westwood , California . He was survived by his son , Charles Robert and daughter Elizabeth Wood Stack . # Selected filmography # # Films # * ' ' First Love ' ' ( 1939 ) * ' ' The Mortal Storm ' ' ( 1940 ) * ' ' A Little Bit of Heaven ' ' ( 1940 ) * ' ' Eagle Squadron ' ' ( 1941 ) * ' ' To Be or Not to Be ' ' ( 1942 ) * ' ' Date with Judy ' ' ( 1948 ) * ' ' Miss Tatlock 's Millions ' ' ( 1948 ) * ' ' Fighter Squadron ' ' ( 1948 ) * ' ' The Bullfighter and the Lady ' ' ( 1951 ) * ' ' My Outlaw Brother ' ' ( 1951 ) * ' ' Bwana Devil ' ' ( 1952 ) * ' ' Sabre Jet ' ' ( 1953 ) * ' ' Conquest of Cochise ' ' ( 1953 ) * ' ' The High and the Mighty ' ' ( 1954 ) * ' ' House of Bamboo ' ' ( 1955 ) * ' ' Good Morning , Miss Dove ' ' ( 1955 ) * ' ' Great Day in the Morning ' ' ( 1956 ) * ' ' Written on the Wind ' ' ( 1956 ) * ' ' The Tarnished Angels ' ' ( 1958 ) * ' ' The Gift of Love ' ' ( 1958 ) * ' ' John Paul Jones ' ' ( 1959 ) * ' ' The Last Voyage ' ' ( 1960 ) * ' ' The Caretakers ' ' ( 1963 ) * ' ' Is Paris Burning ? ' ' ( 1966 ) * ( 1974 ) * ' ' 1941 ' ' ( 1979 ) * ' ' Airplane ! ' ' ( 1980 ) * ' ' Uncommon Valor ' ' ( 1983 ) * ' ' George Washington , mini series ' ' ( 1984 ) * ' ' Big Trouble ' ' ( 1986 ) * ' ' The Transformers : The Movie ' ' ( 1986 ) * ' ' Dangerous Curves ' ' ( 1988 ) * ' ' Plain Clothes ' ' ( 1988 ) * ' ' Caddyshack II ' ' ( 1988 ) * ' ' Joe Versus the Volcano ' ' ( 1990 ) * ' ' Beavis and Butt-head Do America ' ' ( 1996 ) * ' ' BASEketball ' ' ( 1998 ) * ' ' Hercules : Zero to Hero ' ' ( 1999 ) * ' ' Mumford ' ' ( 1999 ) * ' ' Recess : School 's Out ' ' ( 2001 ) * ' ' Killer Bud ' ' ( 2001 ) <small> Denotes he was nominated for an ' ' Academy Award ' ' for ' ' Best Supporting Actor ' ' </small> # Television # * ' ' The Name of the Game ' ' ( TV Series ) ( 1968-1971 ) * ' ' Butt-Ugly Martians ' ' ( voice only ; 200102 ) * ' ' King ; 2001 ) * ' ' Unsolved Mysteries ' ' ( host ; 19872002 ) * ' ' Perry Mason : The Case of the ... ' ' ( 1987 ) * ' ' Murder , She Wrote ' ' ( 1986 ) * ' ' The Untouchables ' ' ( 195963 ) * ' ' The Lords of the Mafia ' ' ( 2000 ) # Books # * ' ' Straight Shooting ' ' ( with Mark Evans ) ( 1980 ) ; ISBN 0-02-613320-2 * ' ' Shotgun Digest ' ' ( Jack Lewis , Editor ) ( 1974 ) ; ISBN 978-0695804978 
 ' ' Acrobates ' ' ' ' Distoechurus ' ' The Acrobatidae are a small family of gliding marsupials containing two genera , each with a single species , the feathertail glider ( ' ' Acrobates pygmaeus ' ' ) from Australia and feather-tailed possum ( ' ' Distoechurus pennatus ' ' ) from New Guinea . This family of the Diprotodontia order , which can be found in the east coast and inland of Australia and in some islands of New Guinea , is characterized by their very small size , which has side effects : because their mass-to-surface-area ratio is so small , heat escapes quicker from their bodies than it would in larger animals ( the larger the mass-to-surface-area ratio , the harder it is to get rid of heat ) . Therefore , when temperature drops or food is scarce , they have trouble maintaining their body temperature and they enter a state known as torpidity ( not to be confused with hibernation , which is not known in marsupials ) which can last between one day and two weeks . In this state drops to almost that of its surroundings , and the animal becomes unresponsive . # Taxonomy # * Family Acrobatidae ** Genus ' ' Acrobates ' ' *** Feathertail glider , ' ' Acrobates pygmaeus ' ' ** Genus ' ' Distoechurus ' ' *** Feather-tailed possum , ' ' Distoechurus pennatus ' ' 
 establishedtitle = Mato Grosso ( lit . Thick Bushes ) is one of the states of Brazil , the third largest by area , located in the western part of the country . Neighboring states are ( from west clockwise ) Rondnia , Amazonas , Par , Tocantins , Gois and Mato Grosso do Sul . It also borders Bolivia to the southwest . A state with a flat landscape , alternating great ' ' chapadas ' ' and plain areas , Mato Grosso presents three different ecosystems : Cerrado , Pantanal and the Amazon Rainforest . The vegetation of the open pasture covers 40% of the state , and the Chapada dos Guimares National Park , with its caves , grottos , tracks and waterfalls , is one of its great tourist attractions . In the north is the Amazonian forest , with a biodiversity covering half of the state . The Xingu National Park and the Araguaia River are in Mato Grosso . Further south , the Pantanal , the world 's largest wetland , is the habitat for almost a thousand species of animals , the Mato Grosso is the Chapada dos Guimares , a unique and beautiful environment made from sandstone mountains and their subsequent erosion . The terrain of the Mato Grosso is varied and includes cliffs , canyons , and beautiful waterfalls . The biologically rich Pantanal , one of the world 's largest wetland/prairie ecosystems , is also located within this state . Much environmental degradation has occurred to the Pantanal within the past few decades , and it shows no sign of stopping anytime soon . The Pantanal can be compared to the Everglades in Florida , as both share much in common , habitat wise , although the Pantanal is of much larger scale . # History # In 1977 , the state was split into two halves , with Mato Grosso do Sul becoming a new state . The Bororo Indians live in the Mato Grosso area . As late as 1880 , soldiers patrolled lands on the outskirts of Cuiab , Mato Grosso 's capital and largest city , to protect settlers from Bororo raids . By the end of the 19th century , although severely reduced by prospectors , settlers , and other indigenous groups , as many as five to ten thousand Bororo continued to occupy central and eastern Mato Grosso , as well as western Gois . The southwestern part of it was ceded to Bolivia in exchange for Acre , according to Treaty of Petrpolis in 1903 . The historic remoteness of this area led it to be the subject of exploration , most notably by Captain Percy Fawcett , in the quest for lost cities . It was also the rumored location of access to the interior of the earth in various Hollow Earth theories . # Demographics # Mato Grosso had a high rate of population growth in the 20th century . Despite this , the state as a whole has one of the lowest population densities of any Brazilian state . Ethnically , the state includes a relatively high proportion of caboclos ( persons of mixed European and Indian ancestry ) , as do other areas of the interior . According to the IBGE of 2008 , 3,010,000 people resided in the state . The population density was 3.2 inh. /km . 2.4% ( 19912000 ) ; Houses : 836,000 ( 2006 ) . The last PNAD ( National Research for Sample of Domiciles ) census revealed the following numbers : 1,532,000 Brown ( Mixed ) people ( 50.92% ) , 1,179,000 White people ( 39.16% ) , 239,000 Black people ( 7.93% ) , 41,000 Amerindian people ( 1.37% ) , 14,000 Asian people ( 0.45% ) . # Economy # Agriculture is the largest component of GDP at 40.8% , followed by the service sector at 40.2% . The industrial sector represents 19% of GDP ( 2004 ) . Mato Grosso exports : soybeans 83% , wood 5.6% , meats 4.8% , and cotton 3.3% ( 2002 ) . The state 's share of the Brazilian economy is 1.7% ( 2005 ) . # Statistics # Vehicles : 745,810 ( March/2007 ) ; Mobile phones : 323,000 ( April/2007 ) ; Telephones : 527,000 ( April/2007 ) ; Cities : 141 ( 2007 ) . # Education # Portuguese is the official national language , as well as the primary language taught in schools . However , English and Spanish are more than 58 universities in state of Mato Grosso . Cuiab is home to the following universities : * Federal University of Mato Grosso ( UFMT ) ; * State University of Mato Grosso ( Unemat ) ; * Universidade de Cuiab ( Unic ) # Culture # The local culture is very rich , due to the influences of and encounters with various cultures , such as Native Americans , the original settlers , the Africans enslaved originally by the Portuguese , and Europeans , beginning with the Portuguese settlers and other European immigrants who arrived later . Two long periods of isolation also contributed to its differentiation , which has been somewhat diluted by recent immigration . Cuiab has an interesting cuisine influenced by natives , with their typical dances , craftwork , and music . Dance and music were traditionally connected to the worship of Catholic saints and their festivals , Saint Benedict ( the city 's patron ) , being one of the favorite . # Carnival # The four-day period before Lent leading up to Ash Wednesday , known as Carnival is well celebrated . As holiday in a typical fashion - including parades , music , and dance - with wide participation . # Tourism and recreation # # Alta Floresta # Fishing in the Teles Pires , So Benedito and Azul rivers is productive practically all year long . Bird watching : with the more than 570 species of catalogued birds and new species being discovered every year , the region of Alta Floresta , Cristalino and Azul River Basin receives constant visits from famous ornithologists and bird watchers . # Chapada dos Guimares # The largest sandstone cavern in Brazil , Aroe Jari , extends nearly 1550 meters and several prehistoric inscriptions can be found inside . # North Pantanal # The Pantanal 's backbone is the Paraguay River , which cuts through the region from north to south . The Miranda , Aquidauna , Taquari and Cuiaba rivers flow into the Paraguay River . From October to April , the high waters reveal outsized lakes , bays , river branches and outlets . The Transpantaneira Highway connects the town of Pocone to Jofre Port , along the Cuiab River bank . It is for 149 km . On the way , it is possible to observe wild animals , especially alligators , capybaras and birds , among other wild animals . SESC 's Private Natural Heritage Reserve ( RPPN ) increases by one-third the total area of this preserved ecosystem in the State of Mato Grosso . Over 160 different species of birds have been observed in the Pantanal , and still many species in the area have not yet been identified . <gallery> File:Rio Paraguai passando por Cceres1.jpgParaguay River in Mato Grosso File:Salgadeira extension.JPGSalgadeira Waterfall **27;105507;TOOLONG Waterfall **25;105536;TOOLONG in Mato Grosso File:Cuiab vista do rio.jpgCuiab River </gallery> # Infrastructure # # International Airport # The runway at Marechal Rondon International Airport was opened to traffic in 1956 . In February 1975 , Infraero took over the airport 's administration and began various upgrades to meet the needs of the airport complex . As of 1996 , Marechal Rondon International Airport , located 10 km ( 6.21 mi ) from the city center , started receiving international flights . Currently , it serves more than half a million passengers a year . # Highways * BR-158 ; * BR-163 ; * BR-197 ; * BR-242 ; * BR-252 ; * BR-364 ; * MT-100 ; * MT-358. # Sports # Cuiab is one of 12 cities chosen to host games of the 2014 FIFA World Cup , which will take place in Brazil . # Flag # The flag has the same colors as the national flag , with blue symbolizing the sky , green the vegetation , and white standing for peace . The star is yellow to symbolize the gold , which attracted the first settlers . The flag was adopted by Decree No. 2 of January 31 , 1890 , just few days after the adoption of the national flag . The Mato Grosso state flag was abolished by Law No. 1.046 of October 8 , 1929 , but reinstated by article 140 of the Constitution of the State of Mato Grosso on July 11 , 1947. </td> </tr> </table> 
 An intraplate earthquake is an earthquake that occurs in the interior of a tectonic plate , whereas an interplate earthquake is one that occurs at a plate boundary . Intraplate earthquakes are relatively rare . Interplate earthquakes , which occur at plate boundaries , are more common . Nonetheless , very large intraplate earthquakes can inflict heavy damage , particularly because such areas are not accustomed to earthquakes and buildings are usually not seismically retrofitted . Examples of damaging intraplate earthquakes are the devastating Gujarat earthquake in 2001 , the 2012 Indian Ocean earthquakes , the 1811-1812 earthquakes in New Madrid , Missouri , and the 1886 earthquake in Charleston , South Carolina . # Fault zones within tectonic plates # The surface of the Earth is made up of seven primary and eight secondary tectonic plates , plus dozens of tertiary microplates . The large plates move very slowly , owing to convection currents within the mantle below the crust . Because they do not all move in the same direction , plates often directly collide or move laterally along each other , a tectonic environment that environments ; most occur on faults near plate margins . By definition , intraplate earthquakes do not occur near plate boundaries , but along faults in the normally stable interior of plates . These earthquakes often occur at the location of ancient failed rifts , because such old structures may present a weakness in the crust where it can easily slip to accommodate regional tectonic strain . Compared to earthquakes near plate boundaries , intraplate earthquakes are not well understood , and the hazards associated with them may be difficult to quantify . # Historic examples # Historic examples of intraplate earthquakes include those in Mineral , Virginia in 2011 ( estimated magnitude 5.8 ) , New Madrid in 1811 and 1812 ( estimated magnitude as high as 8.1 ) , the Boston ( Cape Ann ) earthquake of 1755 ( estimated magnitude 6.0 to 6.3 ) , earthquakes felt in New York City in 1737 and 1884 ( both quakes estimated at about 5.5 magnitude ) , and the Charleston earthquake in South Carolina in 1886 ( estimated magnitude 6.5 to 7.3 ) . The Charleston quake was particularly surprising had almost no history of even minor earthquakes . In 2001 , a large intraplate earthquake devastated the region of Gujarat , India . The earthquake occurred far from any plate boundaries , which meant the region above the epicenter was unprepared for earthquakes . In particular , the Kutch district suffered tremendous damage , where the death toll was over 12,000. # Causes # Many cities live with the seismic risk of a rare , large intraplate earthquake . The cause of these earthquakes is often uncertain . In many cases , the causative fault is deeply buried , and sometimes can not even be found . Under these circumstances it is difficult to calculate the exact seismic hazard for a given city , especially if there was only one earthquake in historical times . Some progress is being made in understanding the fault mechanics driving these earthquakes . # Prediction # Scientists continue to search for the causes of these earthquakes , and especially for some indication of how often they recur . The best success has come with detailed micro-seismic monitoring , involving dense arrays of seismometers . causative fault can be located with great accuracy , and in most cases these line up in patterns consistent with faulting . Cryoseisms can sometimes be mistaken for intraplate earthquakes . 
 Louisburg is the name of some places in the United States of America and Canada : *Louisbourg , Nova Scotia , Canada ( often spelled Louisburg ) *Louisburg , Kansas , United States of America *Louisburg , Minnesota , United States of America *Louisburg , Missouri , United States of America *Louisburg , North Carolina , United States of America 
 A bathroom is a room for personal hygiene , generally containing a bathtub or a shower , and possibly also a bidet . In North America and some other regions , it characteristically contains a toilet and a sink ; hence in North American English the word bathroom is commonly used to mean any room containing a toilet , even a public toilet ( although in the United States this is more commonly called a restroom ) . In other countries , including the UK , Australia , France and Japan , homes may have a separate toilet . In Iran almost all homes have two distinct rooms for bathroom and toilet room . # History # The first records for the use of baths date back as far as 3000 B.C. At this time water had a strong religious value , being seen as a purifying element for both body and soul , and so it was not uncommon for people to be required to cleanse themselves before entering a sacred area . Baths are recorded as part of a village or town life throughout this period America and cold baths in Asia . Communal baths were erected in a distinctly separate area to the living quarters of the village , with a view to preventing evil spirits from entering the domestic quarters of a commune . According to Teresi et al . ( 2002 ) : # The third millennium B.C. was the Age of Cleanliness . Toilets and sewers were invented in several parts of the world , and Mohenjo-Daro circa 2800 B.C. had some of the most advanced , with lavatories built into the outer walls of houses . These were Western-style toilets made from bricks with wooden seats on top . They had vertical chutes , through which waste fell into street drains or cesspits . Sir Mortimer Wheeler , the director general of archaeology in India from 1944 to 1948 , wrote , The high quality of the sanitary arrangements could well be envied in many parts of the world today . # # Nearly all of the hundreds of houses excavated had their own bathing rooms . Generally located on the ground floor , the bath was made of brick , sometimes drained away through a hole in the floor , down chutes or pottery pipes in the walls , into the municipal drainage system . Even the fastidious Egyptians rarely had special bathrooms . # Not all ancient baths were in the style of the large pools that often come to mind when one imagines the Roman baths ; the earliest surviving bathtub dates back to 1700 B.C , and hails from the Palace of Knossos in Crete . What is remarkable about this tub is not only the similarity with the baths of today , but also the way in which the plumbing works surrounding it differ so little from modern models . A more advanced prehistoric ( 15th century BC and before ) system of baths and plumbing is to be found in the excavated town of Akrotiri , on the Aegean island of Thera . There , alabaster tubs and other bath fittings were found , along with a sophisticated twin plumbing system to transport hot and cold water separately . This was probably because of easy access to geothermic hot springs on this volcanic island . Both the an important part of their lifestyles . Writers such as Homer had their heroes bathe in warm water so as to regain their strength ; it is perhaps notable that the mother of Achilles bathed him in order to gain his invincibility . Palaces have been uncovered throughout Greece with areas that are dedicated to bathing , spaces with ceramic bathtubs , as well as sophisticated drainage systems . Homer uses the word , ' ' loetr ' ' , baths , later , ' ' loutr ' ' , from the verb , ' ' loein ' ' , to bathe . The same root finds an even earlier attestation on Linear B tablets , in the name of the River Lousios ( bathing river ) , in Arcadia . Public baths are mentioned by the comedian Aristophanes as , ' ' balanea ' ' ( Sing. : , ' ' balaneon ' ' , Latinized as ' ' balneum ' ' , a balneary ) . The Roman attitudes towards bathing are well documented ; they built large purpose-built thermal baths , marking not only an important social development rejuvenation . Here was a place where people could meet to discuss the matters of the day and enjoy entertainment . During this period there was a distinction between private and public baths , with many wealthy families having their own thermal baths in their houses . Despite this they still made use of the public baths , showing the value that they had as a public institution . The strength of the Roman Empire was telling in this respect ; imports from throughout the world allowed the Roman citizens to enjoy ointments , incense , combs , and mirrors . Although some sources suggest that bathing declined following the collapse of the Roman Empire , this is not completely accurate . It was actually the Middle Ages that saw the beginning of soap production , proof that bathing was definitely not uncommon . It was only after the Renaissance that bathing declined ; water was feared as a carrier of disease , and thus sweat baths and heavy perfumes were preferred . In fact throughout the 16th , 17th , and 18th centuries , the use of public baths declined , thus laying the foundations for the bathroom , as it was to become , in the 20th century . However in Japan shared bathing in sento and onsen ( spas ) still exists ; the latter being very popular . # Variations # # Powder room # A powder room also called 1/2 bath or guest bath usually refers to a room with a toilet and a sink and commonly used by guests . # Shower room # A shower room or shower-room is a room that contains a shower cubicle ( or shower stall ) , but no bathtub . In the United States , this would be called a ' ' 3/4 bathroom ' ' . # Ensuite # An ensuite bathroom or ensuite shower room ( also en suite , ensuite and other variations ) is a bathroom or shower room attached to and only accessible from a bedroom . # Family bathroom # A family bathroom , in British estate agent terminology , is a full bathroom in a house . # Jack and Jill bathroom # A Jack and Jill bathroom is a bathroom with # A wetroom is a waterproof room usually equipped with a shower . It is designed to eliminate moisture damage that is caused to a home and is also compatible with the heating systems beneath the floor . # Regional differences # # Australia and New Zealand # In Australia , New Zealand and other British Commonwealth countries it is common for a bathroom to ' ' not ' ' contain a lavatory ; but with a separate ' toilet ' next door ( a very small room with only a toilet and perhaps a tiny hand washbasin ) . # Terminology in the United States # In the United States , bathrooms are generally categorized as master bathroom , containing a shower and a tub that is adjoining to a master bedroom , a full bathroom ( or full bath ) , containing four plumbing fixtures : bathtub , shower , toilet , and sink ; half ( 1/2 ) bath ( or powder room ) containing just a toilet and sink ; and 3/4 bath containing toilet , sink , and shower , although the terms vary from market , sink , and shower are considered a full bath . This lack of a single , universal definition commonly results in discrepancies between advertised and actual number of baths in real estate listings . An additional complication is that there are currently two ways of notating the number of bathrooms in a dwelling . One method is to count a half bathroom as .5 and then add this to the number of full bathrooms ( e.g. , 2.5 baths would mean 2 full baths and 1 half bath ) . The other , newer method is to put the number of full bathrooms to the left side of the decimal point and to put the number of half bathrooms to the right of the decimal point ( e.g. , 2.1 would mean 2 full baths and 1 half bath ; 3.2 would mean 3 full baths and 2 half baths ) . # Design considerations # The design of a bathroom must account for the use of both hot and cold water , in significant quantities , for cleaning the human body . The water is also used for moving tank . Water may be splashed on the walls and floor , and hot humid air may cause condensation on cold surfaces . From a decorating point of view the bathroom presents a challenge . Ceiling , wall and floor materials and coverings should be impervious to water and readily and easily cleaned . The use of ceramic or glass , as well as smooth plastic materials , is common in bathrooms for their ease of cleaning . Such surfaces are often cold to the touch , however , and so water-resistant bath mats or even bathroom carpets may be used on the floor to make the room more comfortable . Alternatively , the floor may be heated , possibly by strategically placing heater conduits close to the surface . Electrical appliances , such as lights , heaters , and heated towel rails , generally need to be installed as fixtures , with permanent connections rather than plugs and sockets . This minimizes the risk of electric shock . Ground-fault circuit interruptor electrical sockets can reduce the risk of electric shock , and are required for bathroom socket installation by electrical In some countries , such as the United Kingdom , only special sockets suitable for electric shavers are permitted in bathrooms , and are labelled as such . UK Building Regulations also define what type of electrical light fittings ( i.e. how water-/splash-proof ) may be installed in the areas ( zones ) around and above baths , sinks and showers . Bathroom lighting should be uniform , bright and must minimize glare . For all the activities like shaving , showering , grooming etc. one must ensure equitable lighting across the entire bathroom space . The mirror area should definitely have at least two sources of light at least 1 feet apart to eliminate any shadows on the face . Skin tones and hair color are highlighted with a tinge of yellow light . # See also # * Bathroom cabinet * Toilet * Washroom 
 Wendish may refer to : * the Sorbian languages , spoken in Germany * the Prekmurje Slovene , spoken in Slovenia and Hungary * the Wends , a Slav people of Northern Europe 
 Heinrich Hberlin ( 6 September 1868 26 February 1947 ) was a Swiss politician , judge and member of the Swiss Federal Council ( 1920-1934 ) . From 1904 he was a member of the Swiss Council of States , from 1905 member of the Grand Council of the Canton of Thurgau . For four years he presided over the FDP in the Swiss Federal Assembly . On the 12th of February 1920 he was elected to the Federal Council and was in charge of the Justice and Police Department from which he resigned on April 30 , 1934 . Twice , in 1926 and 1931 , he was elected President of the Federal Council , making him the highest ranking representative of the Swiss Confederation . # Biography # # Family background , education # Heinrich Hberlin was born 1868 in Weinfelden as the son of Friedrich Heinrich Hberlin ( 1834-1897 ) . The Hberlin family was influential on many levels in Swiss politics over the years and for this reason was occasionally referred to as the ' ' Dynastengeschlecht der Hberlinge ' ' ( Family Dynasty ) was president of the Council of States . # Professional life # Upon graduation from ' ' Kantonsschule Frauenfeld ' ' in 1887 , he began law studies at the University of Zrich and continued his studies at the University of Leipzig and at the Humboldt University in Berlin . While in Leipzig which was the German stronghold for jurisprudence , he formed a friendship with Prinz Ferdinand von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen , who was later crowned King Ferdinand I. of Great Romania . Though their ways parted , they met again years later when King Ferdinand I. was on an official state visit in Switzerland . Hberlin received his lawyers license in 1891 and completed a short internship in Lausanne at the lawyers office of Federal Councillor Louis Ruchonnet . In 1892 he opened his own law firm in Weinfelden , which two years later he moved to the canton capital of Frauenfeld . He quickly gained a reputation for being an outstanding lawyer and became the most sought after in this area of Switzerland . From 1899 to 1920 he presided over the District Court Frauenfeld . Hberlin got actively judges and lawyers at that time . And in 1904 he was elected into the Swiss Federal Council of which he was president in 1918-1919 . In addition to his political activities at the national level , Hberlin was also active in local politics in the Canton of Thurgau . In 1905 he was elected to the Grand Council of the Canton of Thurgau , where he served for 15 years . Twice he was appointed President of the Grand Council ( 1909/10 and 1915/16 ) . Following the resignation of Federal Councillor Calonder , Hberlin was elected in the first ballot with 124 out of 159 votes as successor on February 12 , 1920 . While in office he was in charge of the Justice and Police Department . During his time in the Federal Council , he was President of the Swiss Confederation in 1926 and 1931 . Hberlin was to a large extent instrumental in the unification of criminal law . Characteristic of his tenure were particularly two rejected laws by the people for the expansion of state security laws , which became known as Lex Hberlin I to protect the civil and democratic state against extremist influences . And in the wake of the rise of Nazism in Germany , he was strongly condemning fascist and Nazi totalitarianism based on his democratic-liberal attitude and was warning of the danger of Hitlers martial aspirations as early as 1932 . Moreover , he was highly regarded for his expertise in his chosen field , the sharpness and preciseness of his dialectic skills , wit and humour . He was known for having a strong sense of justice , whether royalty , upper class , or common people , he treated them all equally . With the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire , Kaiser Karl I. and his wife Zita von Bourbon-Parma went into exile in Switzerland . Kaiser Karl I. gave his word of honor to the Swiss authorities to give notification in case of any intentions of travelling abroad , however , he broke it twice and went to Hungary in a futile attempt to restore the monarchy and to regain power over his lost empire . After that , based on Hberlins initiative , the whole family and their violation of Swiss asylum law and were asked to leave . Nevertheless when one of the children of Empress Zita came down with appendectomy and needed to undergo surgery in Zrich , Hberlin granted them visa extensions for the time being . # Retirement # Even after his retirement he was still much sought after in important matters . He became a board member of one of the biggest Swiss insurance companies Winterthur , and also first president of Pro Helvetia , and was friends and acquaintance with such diverse personalities as the famous German writer Hermann Hesse , and Walter Mittelholzer who was not only a pioneer of Swiss aviation but also one of the first aviation entrepreneurs . Others included the Nobel prize winner for literature Romain Rolland , the Swiss painters Cuno Amiet who is considered a pioneer of modern art in Switzerland and Carl Liner among others . Hberlin died 1947 in Frauenfeld. # Anecdotes # Hberlins most famous and interesting client at the time when he practiced law in Weinfelden was certainly the airship inventor Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin ( 1838-1917 ) . In Hberlins 1934 in which he writes that Count Zeppelin was among other things his client in manners such as border disputes with the eminent psychiatrist Ludwig Binswanger ( 1881-1966 ) who was running an exclusive psychiatric clinic nearby , the Sanatorium Bellevue . When Hberlin and the Count were discussing business matters in the lounge of the Counts family estate Schloss Girsberg , it was not rare that they heard the propeller noise of Count Zeppelins airship passing by . In moments like these , Count Zeppelins attention was drawn away from matters at hand and Hberlin suggested , Excellency , shall we take a break until the airship has passed ? , upon which Count Zeppelin stood up , went to the window with a smile , saying , Yes , you are right , Sir . In the rare moments of leisurely life , Hberlin found a lot of comfort in mountaineering and one day he took his wife to the beautiful Alpine village of Zermatt and when he was introducing her to the different peaks surrounding it , an American tourist standing nearby overheard his explanations and assumed Hberlin and asked politely if it was possible to have him - the President of the Federal Council of Switzerland - as a mountain guide . In his usual manner of being low-key , the president politely explained to the American that he was on a holiday with his wife to show her the natural wonders of the Swiss Alps and thus wasnt the mountain guide the gentlemen had mistaken him to be . During WWI Hberlin was a regiment commander and was stationed with his troops in the Swiss Alps . - In those days it was strongly prohibited for the soldier in charge of guarding horse carriages to ride on top of the carriage , instead the soldier had the duty to run behind the carriage in case anything of the load fell off during the transportation . Needless to say , the soldier on duty was not too thrilled with this task , especially when the carriage was empty after delivering the goods and still he was not allowed to ride on it . So one day a guard of Hberlins regiment sat next up to the coachman on their goods at the designated area . They were going on a mountainous road which had many turns , when all of a sudden Hberlin appeared out of nowhere and harshly questioned the guard why he was sitting on the coach instead of running alongside it . The flabbergasted soldier answered in all honesty , Because Colonel , Sir , I have noticed you too late ! , upon hearing this , Hberlin started to laugh heartily and let the soldier off the hook due to the guards honesty . # Further reading # *Soland , Rolf ( 1997 ) . ' ' Zwischen Proletariern und Potentaten : Bundesrat Heinrich Haberlin , 1868-1947 und seine Tagebucher ' ' , p. 422 . Verlag Neue Zrcher Zeitung . ISBN 978-3858236821 
 number = 80 ( as of 2013 ) mostwins = plainlist * * * * : ' ' 3 times ' ' The UCI Road World Championships , often referred to as the World Cycling Championships , is the annual world championship for bicycle road racing organized by the Union Cycliste Internationale ( UCI ) . The UCI Road World Championships include championships for elite men 's road race and individual time trial . In addition , women 's world championship events are held for the same events in the same manner ; under-23 world championship for cyclists under the age of 23 years old ; junior world championships for cyclists under the age of 19 years old . * The winner of the UCI Road World Championships road race is considered the ' ' World Cycling Champion ' ' ( or ' ' World Road Cycling Champion ' ' ) and earns the right to wear the ' ' Rainbow Jersey ' ' for a full year in road race or stage events . The event is a single ' mass start ' road race , the of the full race distance . * The winner of the UCI Road World Championships Time Trial is considered the ' ' World Time Trial Champion ' ' and earns the right to wear the ' ' Rainbow Jersey ' ' for a full year in individual time trial ( ITT ) events or stages ( for example , the prologue and ITT stages at the Tour de France or other stage races ) . Both the road race and individual time trial events are competed by riders organized by national cycling teams as opposed to commercially sponsored or ' ' trade teams ' ' , which is the standard in professional cycling . # History # The first professional World Cycling Championship took place in 1927 at the Nrburgring in Germany and was won by Alfredo Binda , of Italy . In recent years , the race is held towards the end of the European season , usually following the Vuelta a Espaa . The event can be held over either a relatively flat course which favors cycling sprinters or over a hilly course which favors more of a climbing 's race is usually won by riders on the UCI World Tour or its predecessors . However , in the past there were separate events for amateur riders , mainly from Eastern bloc countries . For men at the elite professional level , the World Cycling Championship , along with the Tour de France , and the Giro d'Italia , forms the Triple Crown of Cycling . # Medalists # Only five cyclists have successfully defended their title ( three Belgians and two Italians ) : Georges Ronsse ( Belgium , 192829 ) ; Rik Van Steenbergen ( Belgium , 195657 ) ; Rik van Looy ( Belgium , 196061 ) ; Gianni Bugno ( Italy , 199192 ) ; Paolo Bettini ( Italy , 200607 ) . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - # Multiple winners # # Medallists by nation # - - 
 Religious art or sacred art is artistic imagery using religious inspiration and motifs and is often intended to uplift the mind to the spiritual . Sacred art involves the ritual and cultic practices and practical and operative aspects of the path of the spiritual realization within the artist 's religious tradition . # Christian art # Christian sacred art is produced in an attempt to illustrate , supplement and portray in tangible form the principles of Christianity , though other definitions are possible . Most Christian groups use or have used art to some extent , although some have had strong objections to some forms of religious image , and there have been major periods of iconoclasm within Christianity . Most Christian art is allusive , or built around themes familiar to the intended observer . One of the most common Christian themes is that of the Virgin Mary holding the infant Jesus . Another is that of Christ on the Cross . For the benefit of the illiterate , an elaborate iconographic system developed to conclusively identify scenes . For example , Saint Agnes depicted with a a shamrock . Each saint holds or is associated with attributes and symbols in sacred art . # History # Early Christian art survives from dates near the origins of Christianity . The oldest surviving Christian paintings are from the site at Megiddo , dated to around the year 70 , and the oldest Christian sculptures are from sarcophagi , dating to the beginning of the 2nd century . Until the adoption of Christianity by Constantine Christian art derived its style and much of its iconography from popular Roman art , but from this point grand Christian buildings built under imperial patronage brought a need for Christian versions of Roman elite and official art , of which mosaics in churches in Rome are the most prominent surviving examples . During the development of Christian art in the Byzantine empire ( see Byzantine art ) , a more abstract aesthetic replaced the naturalism previously established in Hellenistic art . This new style was hieratic , meaning its primary purpose was to convey religious meaning rather than accurately render objects and people . Realistic perspective , proportions , light and color were ignored and standardized conventions to portray individuals and events . The controversy over the use of ' ' graven images ' ' , the interpretation of the Second Commandment , and the crisis of Byzantine Iconoclasm led to a standardization of religious imagery within the Eastern Orthodoxy . The Renaissance saw an increase in monumental secular works , but until the Protestant Reformation Christian art continued to be produced in great quantities , both for churches and clergy and for the laity . During this time , Michelangelo Buonarroti painted the Sistine Chapel and carved the famous ' ' Piet ' ' , Gianlorenzo Bernini created the massive columns in St. Peter 's Basilica , and Leonardo da Vinci painted the ' ' Last Supper ' ' . The Reformation had a huge effect on Christian art , rapidly bringing the production of public Christian art to a virtual halt in Protestant countries , and causing the destruction of most of the art that already existed . As a secular , non-sectarian , universal notion of art arose in 19th century Western Europe , secular artists occasionally treated Christian themes ( Bouguereau included in the historical canon ( such as Rouault or Stanley Spencer ) . However many modern artists such as Eric Gill , Marc Chagall , Henri Matisse , Jacob Epstein , Elizabeth Frink and Graham Sutherland have produced well-known works of art for churches . Since the advent of printing , the sale of reproductions of pious works has been a major element of popular Christian culture . In the nineteenth century , this included genre painters such as Mihly Munkcsy . The invention of color lithography led to broad circulation of holy cards . In the modern era , companies specializing in modern commercial Christian artists such as Thomas Blackshear and Thomas Kinkade , although widely regarded in the fine art world as kitsch , have been very successful . The last part of the 20th and the first part of the 21st century have seen a focused effort by artists who claim faith in Christ to re-establish art with themes that revolve around faith , Christ , God , the Church , the Bible and other classic Christian themes as worthy of respect by the secular art world both in sacred and secular arts . Other notable artists include Larry D. Alexander , Gary P. Bergel , Carlos Cazares , Bruce Herman , Deborah Sokolove , and John August Swanson . ' ' See also Madonna and Child , Icon , Images of Jesus ' ' # Buddhist art # Buddhist art originated on the Indian subcontinent following the historical life of Siddhartha Gautama , 6th to 5th century BC , and thereafter evolved by contact with other cultures as it spread throughout Asia and the world . Buddhist art followed believers as the dharma spread , adapted , and evolved in each new host country . It developed to the north through Central Asia and into Eastern Asia to form the Northern branch of Buddhist art , and to the east as far as Southeast Asia to form the Southern branch of Buddhist art . In India , Buddhist art flourished and even influenced the development of Hindu art , until Buddhism nearly disappeared in India around the 10th century due in part to the vigorous expansion of Islam alongside Hinduism. # Tibetan Buddhist art # Most Tibetan Buddhist tantra . Tibetan art includes thangkas and mandalas , often including depictions of Buddhas and bodhisattvas . Creation of Buddhist art is usually done as a meditation as well as creating an object as aid to meditation . An example of this is the creation of a sand mandala by monks ; before and after the construction prayers are recited , and the form of the mandala represents the pure surroundings ( palace ) of a Buddha on which is meditated to train the mind . The work is rarely , if ever , signed by the artist . Other Tibetan Buddhist art includes metal ritual objects , such as the vajra and the phurba. # Indian Buddhist art # Two places suggest more vividly than any others the vitality of Buddhist cave painting from about the 5th century AD . One is Ajanta , a site in India long forgotten until discovered in 1817 . The other is Dunhuang , one of the great oasis staging posts on the Silk Road ... The paintings range from calm devotional images of the Buddha to lively and crowded scenes , often Indian sculpture than in painting . Major art included mosques and a madonna ( art of Mary and possibly her child ) # Islamic art # A prohibition against depicting representational images in religious art , as well as the naturally decorative nature of Arabic script , led to the use of calligraphic decorations , which usually involved repeating geometrical patterns that expressed ideals of order and nature . It was used on religious architecture , carpets , and handwritten documents . Islamic art has reflected this balanced , harmonious world-view . It focuses on spiritual essence rather than physical form . While there has been an aversion to potential idol worship through Islamic history , this is a distinctly modern Sunni view . Persian miniatures , along with medieval depictions of Muhammad and angels in Islam , stand as prominent examples contrary to the modern Sunni tradition . Also , Shi'a Muslims are much less averse to the depiction of figures , including the Prophets as long as the depiction is respectful . # Figure representation in Islamic sacred art # The Islamic resistance to the representation of living beings forms is unique to God , and it is for this reason that the role of images and image makers has been controversial.he strongest statements on the subject of figural depiction are made in the Hadith ( Traditions of the Prophet ) , where painters are challenged to breathe life into their creations and threatened with punishment on the Day of Judgment . The Qur'an is less specific but condemns idolatry and uses the Arabic term musawwir ( maker of forms , or artist ) as an epithet for God . Partially as a result of this religious sentiment , figures in painting were often stylized and , in some cases , the destruction of figurative artworks occurred . Iconoclasm was previously known in the Byzantine period and aniconicism was a feature of the Judaic world , thus placing the Islamic objection to figurative representations within a larger context . As ornament , however , figures were largely devoid of any larger significance and perhaps therefore posed less challenge . As with other forms of Islamic ornamentation , artists freely adapted and stylized basic human and animal forms , giving rise # Calligraphy is the most highly regarded and most fundamental element of Islamic art . It is significant that the Qur'an , the book of God 's revelations to the Prophet Muhammad , was transmitted in Arabic , and that inherent within the Arabic script is the potential for developing a variety of ornamental forms . The employment of calligraphy as ornament had a definite aesthetic appeal but often also included an underlying talismanic component . While most works of art had legible inscriptions , not all Muslims would have been able to read them . One should always keep in mind , however , that calligraphy is principally a means to transmit a text , albeit in a decorative form . From its simple and primitive early examples of the 5th and 6th century A.D. , the Arabic alphabet developed rapidly after the rise of Islam in the 7th century into a beautiful form of art . The main two families of calligraphic styles were the dry styles , called generally the Kufic , and the soft cursive styles , which include Naskhi , Thuluth , Nastaliq and many others the three nonfigural types of decoration in Islamic art , which also include calligraphy and vegetal patterns . Whether isolated or used in combination with nonfigural ornamentation or figural representation , geometric patterns are popularly associated with Islamic art , largely due to their aniconic quality . These abstract designs not only adorn the surfaces of monumental Islamic architecture but also function as the major decorative element on a vast array of objects of all types 
 The tamaraw or Mindoro dwarf buffalo , with the scientific name ' ' Bubalus mindorensis ' ' , is a small , hoofed mammal belonging to the family Bovidae . It is endemic to the island of Mindoro in the Philippines , and is the only endemic Philippine bovine . It is believed , however , to have once also thrived on the larger island of Luzon . The tamaraw was originally found all over Mindoro , from sea level up to the mountains ( 2000 meters above sea level ) , but because of human habitation , hunting , and logging , it is now restricted to only a few remote grassy plains and is now an endangered species . Contrary to common belief and past classification , the tamaraw is not a subspecies of the local carabao , which is only slightly larger , or the common water buffalo . In contrast to the carabao , it has a number of distinguishing characteristics : it is slightly hairier , has light markings on its face , is not gregarious , and has shorter horns that are in the country . # Anatomy and morphology # ' ' Bubalus mindorensis ' ' has the appearance of a typical member of its family . It has a compact , heavyset , bovine body , four legs that end in cloven hooves and a small , horned head at the end of a short neck . It is smaller and stockier compared to the Asiatic water buffalo ( ' ' Bubalus bubalis ' ' ) . There is little sexual dimorphism in the species although males are reported to have thicker necks . The tamaraw has an average shoulder height of 100-105cm in . The length of the body is 2.2m ft while the tail adds a further 60cm in . Reported weights have ranged from 180to300kg lb . Adults have a dark brown to grayish color and more hair than ' ' Bubalus bubalis ' ' . The limbs are short and stocky . White markings are seen in the hooves and the inner lower forelegs . These markings are similar to that of the anoa ' ' Bubalus depressicornis ' ' . The face is the same color of the species also has a pair of gray-white strips that begins from the inner corner of the eye to the horns . The nose and lips have black skin . The ears are 13.5 centimeters long from notch to tip with white markings on the insides . Both sexes grows short black horns in a V-shaped manner compared to C-shaped horns of ' ' Bubalus bubalis ' ' . The horns have flat surfaces and are triangular at their base . Due to the regular rubbing , the tamaraw 's horns have a worn outer surface but with rough inner sides . The horns are reported to be 35.5 to 51.0 centimeters long . However as anti-malarial medicine was developed , more people settled on the island . The increase in human activity has drastically reduced tamaraw population . By 1966 the tamaraw 's range was reduced to three areas : Mount Iglit , Mount Calavite and areas near the Sablayan Penal Settlement . By 2000 , their range was further reduced to only two areas : the Mounts Iglit-Baco National Park and Aruyan . Initial estimates of the ' at around 10,000 individuals in the early 1900s . Less than fifty years later in 1949 , the population had dwindled to around a thousand individuals . By 1953 , fewer than 250 animals were estimated to be alive . These population estimates continually grew smaller until the IUCN publication of their 1969 Red Data Book , where the tamaraw population was noted to be an alarmingly low 100 heads . This head count rose to 120 animals in 1975 . Current estimates place the wild tamaraw population from thirty to two hundred individuals . # Ecology and life history # As a rare , endemic mammal on a relatively secluded island , the ecology of the tamaraw is largely unknown . Individuals of the species are reclusive and shy away from humans . In addition , the small sizes of the species ' subpopulations , already spread thin throughout their fragmented range ( on 1986 , about 51 individuals are found in a 20 square kilometer area ) , make contact with any more than a solitary individual a rarity . # Habitat # ' ' Bubalus mindorensis ' ' in thick brush , near open-canopied glades where it may graze and feed on grasses . Since human habitation and subsequent forest fragmentation of their home island of Mindoro , the habitat preferences of the tamaraw have somewhat expanded to lower-altitude grassy plains . Within their mountainous environment , tamaraws will usually be found not far from sources of water . # Trophic ecology # The tamaraw is a grazer that feeds on grasses and young bamboo shoots although it is known to prefer cogon and ' ' talahib ' ' ( ' ' Saccharum spontaneum ' ' ) . They are naturally diurnal , feeding during the daytime hours ; however , daytime human activities have recently forced select ' ' B. mindorensis ' ' individuals to be nocturnal to avoid human contact . # Life history # The tamaraw is known to live for about 20 years , with an estimated lifespan of about 25 . The adult female tamaraw gives birth to one offspring after a gestation period of about 300 days . There is an interbirth interval of two years , although one female has been sighted with its mother before becoming independent . # Behavioral ecology # Unlike the closely related water buffalo , ' ' B. mindorensis ' ' is a solitary creature . Adults of the species do not occur in herds or smaller packs and are often encountered alone . Only juveniles exhibit the typical bovine herding behavior and clan hierarchy often seen in water buffalo . Males and females are known to associate all year round but this interaction lasts only a few hours . It has been suggested that this solitary behavior is an adaptation to its forest environment . Adult males are often solitary and apparently aggressive while adult females can be alone , accompanied by a bull , or three young of different ages . Similar to other bovines , the tamaraw wallows in mud pits . It has been suggested that this behavior is employed by the animals in order to avoid biting insects . Another distinct behavior in ' ' B. mindorensis ' ' is their fierceness . There are reports concerning their fierceness when cornered although most are unsubstantiated . Threat posture used by the bovine involves vertical position . This is accompanied with a lateral shaking of the head . # Evolutionary history # The presence of ' ' B. mindorensis ' ' on the island of Mindoro , coupled with the discovery of fossil bubalids in other islands around the archipelago indicates that the family was once widespread throughout the Philippines . Recent genetic analysis studies of the family members further strengthen this view . # Etymology and taxonomic history # The tamaraw was originally described as ' ' Anoa mindorensis ' ' by the French zoologist Pierre Marie Heude in 1888 . In 1958 , it was described as ' ' Anoa bubalis mindorensis ' ' , a subspecies of the then-water buffalo species ( ' ' Anoa bubalis ' ' ) . A little over a decade after , the tamaraw was elevated to species status as ' ' Anoa mindorensis ' ' in 1969 . The name ' ' tamaraw ' ' has other variants like ' ' tamarau ' ' , ' ' tamarou ' ' and ' ' tamarao ' ' . It has been suggested that the term ' ' which is a probable alternative name for the Banteng ( ' ' Bos javanicus ' ' ) . # Conservation # Being an entirely endemic and rare land mammal , ' ' Bubalus mindorensis ' ' stands as an extremely vulnerable species . Currently , it is classified as a critically endangered species and has been so since 2000 by the IUCN on its IUCN Red List of endangered species . Awareness of the conservation status of ' ' Bubalus mindorensis ' ' began way back in 1965 when it was classified as ' ' Status inadequately known ' ' by the IUCN . Enough data was gathered on the tamaraw population by 1986 , and the IUCN conservation monitoring center declared the species endangered . Throughout succeeding surveys conducted in 1988 , 1990 , 1994 and 1996 , the species remained listed on the Red List as ' ' endangered ' ' . The relisting of the species in 1996 fulfilled the IUCN criteria ' ' B1+2c ' ' and ' ' D1 ' ' . Criterion ' ' B1 ' ' indicated that the species ' range was less less than five independent locations . A noticed continuing decline in the population fulfilled sub-criterion ' ' 2c ' ' , given the condition of the population 's sole habitat . Criterion ' ' D1 ' ' essentially required that a population be composed of less than 250 mature individuals ; individual counts of the ' ' B. mindorensis ' ' population at the time figured significantly lower than this . In 2000 , the tamaraw was relisted on the Red List under the more severe ' ' C1 ' ' criteria . This was due to estimates that the population would decline by 20% in five years or within the timespan of two generations . Many factors have contributed to the decline of the tamaraw population . Over the course of the century , the increase of the human population on Mindoro has exposed the island 's sole tamaraw population to severe anthropogenic pressures . In the 1930s , the introduction of non-native cattle on the island caused a severe rinderpest epidemic among the tamaraw population then-numbering in the thousands . Hunting of tamaraws for food and sustenance has also most major factor threatening survival of ' ' B. mindorensis ' ' is habitat loss due to infrastructure development , logging and agriculture . These factors reduced the population of thousands during the early 1900s to less than 300 individuals in 2007 . Due to the decline of the ' ' B. mindorensis ' ' population , various Philippine laws and organizations have been created towards the conservation of the species . In 1936 , Commonwealth Act No. 73 was enacted by the then-Philippine Commonwealth . The act specifically prohibited killing , hunting and even merely wounding tamaraws , with an exception noted for self-defense ( if one were to be attacked by an agitated individual ) or for scientific purposes . The penalties were harsh enough to include a hefty fine and imprisonment . In 1979 , an executive order was signed creating a committee specifically geared towards the conservation of the tamaraw . The tamaraw was referred to as a source of national pride in the said E.O . The Tamaraw Conservation Project was also established in 1979 . The organization has successfully bred a tamaraw , nicknamed Kali Act 9147 , or the Wildlife Resources Conservation and Protection Act was enacted to protect the tamaraw and other endemic species from hunting and sale . During the 1970s , a gene pool was established to preserve the tamaraw 's numbers . However , the project was not successful as only one offspring , named Kali , was produced . As of 2011 , Kali is the only surviving animal in the gene pooling project . The project was also not improved as the Protected Areas and Wildlife Bureau shown that the tamaraws were already breeding in the wild . Cloning was not implemented for conservation as the Department of Environment and Natural Resource argued that such measures would diminish the genetic diversity of the species . A small subpopulation of tamaraw has been found within the confines of the Mt . Iglit Game Refuge and Bird Sanctuary on the same island of Mindoro . As of May 2007 , ' ' Bubalus mindorensis ' ' is on ' ' Appendix I ' ' of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species where it has been since the species was . With the listing , CITES recognizes the species as critically endangered and threatened with extinction . Thus , international commercial trade in the species or any derivatives of which , such as the meat , horns or flesh is considered illegal . While commercial trade in the species is prohibited , exchange for non-commercial reasons such as scientific research is allowed . # Importance to humans # # Economical and commercial value # While not as heavily exploited as other large , endangered mammals , the tamaraw population on Mindoro was subject to some harvesting pressure from subsistence hunters before conservation efforts were spurred towards the latter half of the 20th century . The IUCN has described this as still ongoing in their 2006 Red List report . # In Philippine culture # Though the national animal of the Philippines is the carabao , In the 1970s Toyota Motors , through the defunct local company Delta Motors , built the Tamaraw AUV ( Asian Utility Vehicle ) . Because of its ruggedness and simplicity of design , some examples still survive to this day , copied by multinational companies Ford manufacturers to this day . Because it is an Asian Utility Vehicle , it shares its design with the Kijang , the Indonesian version . Automobile maker Toyota once held a franchise in the Philippine Basketball Association , naming its team the Toyota Tamaraws ( see below ) . During the wake of the Asian utility popularity in the 1990s , Toyota Motors Philippines released an Asian Utili